note: the following is the original INSTALL file from 1999, it remains for
historical interest, see README.md for the modern install instructions

			INSTALLING FAR HORIZONS


Here are the steps needed to install Far Horizons on a Unix or Linux
computer (you will have to make appropriate modifications for other
computers):

	gunzip fh.tar.gz
	tar xf fh.tar

The above command(s) will create a subdirectory in your current
directory called "fh", which in turn will contain five of its own
subdirectories "bash", "bin", "doc", "game", and "src".

Next, do this:

	cd fh/src
	make.all

The above will create all of the executable binaries and place them in
fh/bin.  You may want to add fh/bin to your search path.

There are a few utility programs that I have not had time to document,
such as Edit, Set, TurnNumber, etc.  You can either ignore these or
scrutinize the source code to see what they do.  They are not necessary
for running a game, but you may find some of them useful.

The directory fh/bash contains several scripts that I use to make my job
easier.  You will probably have to modify them for your own use.  If you
decide to use them, you may want to move them to fh/bin or add fh/bash
to your execution path.  Use the following commands to get help for each
one:

fhclean --help
fhmail --help
fhorders --help
fhreports --help
source fhsave --help
source fhtest --help

Some of the above scripts use a file named "fh_names" in the fh/game
directory.  This file contains the species number, species name, and
email address for each player.  A sample is provided with this
distribution that you can use as an example.

There are a few other files in the fh/game directory that you should
look at as well.

Finally, the Gamemaster should read file fh/doc/gm_sequence.  It
provides a brief description of the steps needed to start and run a
game.
