==================
 **Far Horizons**
==================

:Author: Rick Morneau
:Date:   January 2, 1999

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

.. raw:: latex

   \tableofcontents

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

GAME BASICS
===========

The following sections will discuss the basic concepts used throughout
the game.

THE GAME TURN
-------------

A game turn is about five Earth years long. As a result, generations can
pass in a single game. Populations will increase and colonies will grow.
Since quite a lot can happen in five years, FAR HORIZONS is strategic in
nature, rather than tactical. The reason for a five year turn will be
explained below.

THE GALAXY
----------

In FAR HORIZONS, the galaxy is a small open star cluster. It is
approximately spherical, but is projected onto an easy-to-use
two-dimensional map. The size of the galaxy and the actual number of
stars in it will depend on the number of players. As an example, for a
game with about 15 players, the galaxy would have a radius of
approximately 18 parsecs and contain about 80 usable star systems.

The basic unit of interstellar distance is the PARSEC, which is equal to
3.26 light-years. Thus, every star system in the galaxy will have an X,
Y, and Z coordinate in parsecs, relative to the reference point at
0,0,0. Furthermore, all coordinate values are zero or greater. Thus, you
can picture the galaxy as floating in a box whose lower, left, rear
corner has the coordinates 0,0,0. (Negative numbers were used in earlier
games, but players sometimes forgot the minus signs, with disastrous
results. Use of only positive numbers will help prevent mistakes.)

SPACE TRAVEL
------------

In this universe, scientists have discovered only one way to break the
barrier imposed by the speed of light. The method is inherently risky.
Essentially, a spaceship’s engines must “rip” a hole through the
space-time fabric in order to travel from one point to another. A ship
does this by creating a temporary, private “wormhole” that the ship can
pass through. A ship does this by creating and manipulating a small
black hole. When a ship travels in this way, it is said to “jump” to its
destination.

There is no limit to how far a ship can travel in this way, but greater
distances involve greater risks. The technology involved is called
“avitics”, and the more experience a species has in this technology, the
farther a ship can jump without risk of missing its destination or of
being destroyed.

The time needed for a ship to travel through the wormhole is independent
of the distance being traveled. However, it IS dependent on the mass of
the ship, as shown by the following equation:

.. math:: \textrm{time in years} = 5\: tanh (\textrm{mass in grams})

If you’re not mathematically inclined, don’t worry! What the equation
says is that it takes almost exactly five years for anything larger than
a pea, since all masses used in the game will be at the extreme
asymptotic limit of the equation. Only extremely small masses (such as
the photons that make up radio waves) can take significantly less than 5
years to travel through a wormhole.

Note also that no time goes by for the people on the ship. For them, the
move is essentially instantaneous. For the people who remain behind,
however, the ship will appear to “wink out” immediately. Five years
later, it will reappear at its destination.

Creation of a wormhole is risky business, and there is always a chance
that a ship can be swallowed up by the wormhole it creates. If this
happens, then the ship and everything it carries will be totally
destroyed. It is also possible for a ship to “mis-jump”. If this occurs,
the ship will not be destroyed, but will simply arrive at the wrong
destination. As a species gains knowlit (or edge and experience in
gravitics technology, its ships will become more reliable and less
susceptible to sudden destruction or mis-jumps.

COMMUNICATIONS
--------------

Communications across interstellar distances utilizes the same
technology as space travel, but on a much smaller scale. Any two
tranceivers can be “tuned” to each other (if both sides cooperate),
effectively creating a small wormhole through which radio waves can
pass. Also, since radio waves have very close to zero mass, the
transmission time is close to zero. Thus, although ships require five
years to move between star systems, radio communication is essentially
instantaneous, and home planets can always be in instant communication
with their ships and colonies. Note, though, that ships in transit are
incapable of communicating, since, for them, no time is actually
passing.

THE HOME PLANET
---------------

Each player starts the game with a home planet. This is where his
species evolved, acquired intelligence, and eventually learned how to
travel among the stars.

At the start of the game, the only material resources available to a
species are those of its home planet. These resources can be used to
build units such as mines, factories, spaceships, planetary defenses,
etc. As the game proceeds, a species can colonize other planets and tap
them for resources as well.

TECH LEVELS
-----------

A tech level is a measure of how advanced a species is in a specific
field of technology. Six technologies are defined and used in this game.
Each one is described below:

MINING
   Mining tech level is a measure of how proficient a species is at
   tapping a planet’s natural resources. It includes functions such as
   mining and farming, and basic refining and food processing. As mining
   tech level increases, greater quantities of raw materials can be
   produced.

MANUFACTURING
   Manufacturing tech level is a measure of proficiency at converting
   raw materials to usable, final forms. It is used to determine how
   many units, such as ships, can be built each turn. It also places a
   limit on the maximum size of ships that a species can build.

MILITARY
   Military tech level is a measure of experience in warfare. It
   indicates the level of sophistication in military strategy, tactics,
   and weaponry. It is one of the major factors used to determine the
   outcome of armed conflict.

GRAVITICS
   Gravitics tech level is a measure of a species’ knowledge of gravity
   control. Gravitics allows the design of the engines which drive
   interstellar ships, since a black hole cannot be created and
   controlled without the ability to manipulate gravitational fields.

LIFE SUPPORT
   Life support tech level is a measure of a species’ experience in
   surviving in hostile environments. It is used to construct and
   maintain artificial shelters on planets with temperatures or
   atmospheres that differ from the home planet. It also determines the
   effectiveness of defensive shields used on ships.

BIOLOGY
   Biology tech level is a measure of a species’ knowledge and
   experience in the life sciences. Its most obvious applications are in
   genetic engineering, germ warfare, and terraforming (i.e., using
   specially designed micro-organisms to modify the atmosphere and
   micro-flora of a planet, making it more suitable for habitation).

There are many other applications of the six basic technologies in
addition to the ones mentioned above. These will be discussed later.
After the start of the game, tech levels will increase primarily through
research. While there is no limit to how high a tech level can get, in
practice it is unlikely that a tech level will ever exceed 100.

TURN PROCESSING: Sequence of Events
-----------------------------------

Each turn is processed in six steps, and the order form that you send to
the gamemaster has six corresponding sections. These sections are:

#. Combat orders

#. Pre-departure orders

#. Jump orders

#. Production orders

#. Post-arrival orders

#. Strike orders

When your turn is processed, all combat orders are processed first, then
all pre-departure orders, then all jump orders, and so on. After yur
orders have been processed, a special program is run that handles
population growth and interspecies transactions, and performs several
other housekeeping chores. Finally, a "report" program is run that
generates summaries that will be sent to the players. Thus, several
programs are actually used by the gamemaster to process a turn.

[The strike phase is a limited-combat phase. Any combat that takes place
in the strike phase generally takes the form of an initial surprise
attack. Combat that requires more time, such as bombardment and siege,
will take place in the combat phase of the following turn, and are thus
continuations of the combat that began in the strike phase.]

At the end of each report is an order form that you will need to fill
out. This form will contain all six sections, even though not all of
them may be applicable for the current turn. For example, the jump
section cannot be used in the first turn, since you have no ships.
Simply delete the sections that do not apply, and fill out and send in
those that do.

Each section of the orders begins with a START command and ends with an
END command. Each section should only appear ONCE. Thus, each order form
will contain the following sections:

::

   START COMBAT
   ;Combat orders belong here.

   END

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ;Pre-departure orders belong here.

   END

   START JUMPS
   ;Jump orders belong here.

   END

   START PRODUCTION
   ;Production orders belong here.

   END

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ;Post-arrival orders belong here.

   END

   START STRIKES
   ;Strike orders belong here.

   END

The production section will be started for you, and will have an
appropriate PRODUCTION order for each planet you control. This will save
you a little time, and will help prevent you from accidentally
forgetting to give orders for a planet.

The six sections shown above may appear in any sequence. However, it is
recommended that you fill out your orders using the sequence provided,
since that is the sequence in which they will be executed. In other
words, combat orders will be executed before pre-departure orders,
pre-departure orders will be executed before jump orders, and so forth,
REGARDLESS of where each section appears in your order form.

The orders that you give in each section must be reasonable for that
section. For example, you may not give JUMP orders in any section except
the jump section. BUILD and RESEARCH orders may only be given in the
production section. Combat orders may only be given in the combat and
strike sections. And so on. Here is a complete list:

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\itemsep}{1pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parskip}{0pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}

Attack

Battle

Engage

Haven

Hide

Hijack

Summary

Target

Withdraw

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\itemsep}{1pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parskip}{0pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}

Ally

Base

Deep

Destroy

Disband

Enemy

Install

Land

Message

Name

Neutral

Orbit

Repair

Scan

Send

Transfer

Unload

Zzz

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\itemsep}{1pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parskip}{0pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}

Jump

Move

Pjump

Visited

Wormhole

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\itemsep}{1pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parskip}{0pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}

Ally

Ambush

Build

Continue

Develop

Enemy

Estimate

Hide

Ibuild

Icontinue

Intercept

Neutral

Production

Recycle

Research

Shipyard

Upgrade

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\itemsep}{1pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parskip}{0pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}

Ally

Auto

Deep

Destroy

Enemy

Land

Message

Name

Neutral

Orbit

Repair

Scan

Send

Teach

Telescope

Terraform

Transfer

Zzz

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\itemsep}{1pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parskip}{0pt}

.. raw:: latex

   \setlength{\parsep}{0pt}

same as combat section

All of these commands will be explained in later sections of this
document.

A special note must be made about the TRANSFER command. There is a
possible situation in which colonists and supplies could be transferred
to a new colony immediately after a jump. If the planet is already
inhabited by another species, neither species will know about the new
colony until the next turn. To prevent this very unrealistic kind of
incident, a TRANSFER to a planet may only be made in the post-arrival
phase IF the planet is already inhabited by the species making the
transfer. Otherwise, the transfer will have to be done in the
pre-departure phase of the next turn. Once the colony has been
established, you may TRANSFER goods to the planet in either the
pre-departure or post-arrival phases.

VICTORY CONDITIONS
------------------

There are no final winners or losers in Far Horizons, just as there
aren’t any in other role-playing games. The only purpose of the game is
to have fun. However, for those who want to know how well they did
relative to the other players, the following will be done:

   At the end of a game, a final summary report will be sent to all
   players, and will contain a list of the total revenue-generating
   capacity of each species along with their final tech levels and other
   statistics. These values can be used to get a good idea of who "won"
   the game.

A game will last between 20 and 100 turns. The actual final turn number
will be randomly determined by the gamemaster and will be kept secret
until the end of the game is announced. This approach will prevent the
unrealistic gameplay that always results when players know that the game
is about to end. The gamemaster may arbitrarily and secretly extend the
game if he feels it would be inappropriate to interrupt an “interesting”
situation, or if he is convinced that everyone is having a lot of fun.

STARS AND PLANETS
=================

As mentioned earlier, the galaxy of FAR HORIZONS is a small open star
cluster, similar to the Pleiades Cluster.

In a real cluster, many of the stars would be components of binary or
trinary star systems. In fact, such multiple star systems make up about
85% of all star systems in the Milky Way galaxy. In systems such as
these, planets, if any, are likely to have very odd orbits, and if they
have atmospheres, their climates are likely to be extremely erratic. As
a result, multiple star systems have been totally eliminated from the
game. You can assume that they exist, but they will not be shown on star
maps or be made available for use by players.

STARS
-----

The location of a star is indicated by its X, Y, and Z coordinates,
which are always positive integers greater than or equal to zero. I
assume here that the reader has sufficient technical background to
understand how to work with these coordinates (called Cartesian
Coordinates). Just as a reminder, though, the distance between any two
stars can be calculated using the formula:

.. math:: \textrm{distance}  =  \sqrt{ (X2 - X1)^2   +  (Y2 - Y1)^2   +  (Z2 - Z1)^2 }

Most distances can be estimated by simply looking at the map and
counting squares. Finicky players, however, may want to calculate exact
distances using the above formula.

Any region of space defined by a set of specific X Y Z coordinates is
called a “sector”. Thus, the number of sectors in the galaxy is simply
the number of possible combinations of X, Y, and Z. Most sectors are
effectively empty. Only a relatively small number of sectors contain
usable stars and planets.

SPECTRAL CLASS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The information in this section is for “color” only, and does not play
an important role in the game. Feel free to skim through it. Do not let
the technical jargon bother you.

| In addition to its galactic coordinates, a star is identified by its
  spectral class, which indicates both its color and its size. In
  general, stars which radiate more towards the red end of the spectrum
  are smaller than those which radiate more towards the blue end of the
  spectrum. There are, however, many exceptions. It is not uncommon to
  find red giants or blue dwarves. Also, in general, large stars will
  have more usable planets than small stars.
| Here is a list of the most common spectral colors:

O
   - Blue stars, hottest and largest (eg. Lambda Orionis)

B
   - Blue-white (eg. Rigel, Spica)

A
   - White (eg. Sirius, Vega)

F
   - Yellow-white (eg. Canopus, Procyon)

G
   - Yellow (eg. Earth’s sun, Capella))

K
   - Orange (eg. Arcturus, Pollux)

M
   | - Red stars, coolest and smallest (eg. Antares, Betelgeuse)

Here is a list of the most common spectral types:

(not marked)
   - main sequence star

d
   - ordinary dwarf star

g
   - ordinary giant star

D
   | - degenerate dwarf star

Each class contains ten subdivisions numbered 0 through 9. Thus an F5
star is approximately halfway between F0 and G0. Zero indicates the
hottest within the spectral class, while 9 indicates the coolest with
the class.

Here are some examples:

O8
   Blue

dF1
   Yellow-white dwarf

DA5
   Degenerate white dwarf

G6
   Yellow

gG9
   Yellow giant

dM5
   red dwarf

DB
   Degenerate blue-white dwarf

gK7
   Orange giant

It is customary to drop the number in the designation of degenerate
dwarf stars. Thus, in the astronomical literature, one is more likely to
see “DA” rather than “DA5”. I have left them in, however, for
consistency.

The star map which you will receive from the gamemaster will be two-
dimensional, and will show X and Y coordinates on the axes. If a star
exists at a particular X,Y coordinate, then a number and a spectral type
will be displayed at that location. The number will be the Z coordinate.
Thus, if you see the following:

::

                    12
                   gF6

at the position on the map where X=5 and Y=9, it indicates that a giant
yellow- white star is located at coordinates X=5, Y=9, Z=12.

PLANETS
-------

Planets are real estate, and are the ultimate source of all wealth and
power in the game. As a result, planets are also the most common cause
of interstellar conflict.

In the following sections, the various terms used to describe a planet’s
physical characteristics will be discussed. It is by evaluating these
characteristics that a player can decide if a planet is suitable for
colonization and/or exploitation by his species. For reference, here is
a sample of a star system scan:

::

   Coordinates:    x = 7   y = 10  z = 18  stellar type =  A0   8 planets.

                   Temp  Press Mining
      #  Dia  Grav Class Class  Diff  LSN  Atmosphere
     ---------------------------------------------------------------------
      1    5  0.28  23     3    0.37   42  Cl2(100%)
      2   14  0.80  23     6    0.38   39  F2(33%),H2O(67%)
      3   12  0.91  18     9    0.65   24  HCl(38%),Cl2(32%),F2(30%)
      4   21  2.00  15     6    0.38   24  CO2(29%),HCl(43%),Cl2(17%),F2(11%)
      5   14  0.96  10     9    2.25    0  N2(47%),CO2(23%),O2(30%)
      6  189  2.67   4    18    4.34   33  CH4(49%),NH3(48%),N2(3%)
      7  103  1.94   3    17    0.49   33  H2(58%),CH4(42%)
      8   34  2.46   3    11    0.77   21  He(40%),N2(60%)

PLANET NUMBER
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each planet has a number, indicating its relative position around the
sun. Planet number 1 is closest to the sun. The planet with the largest
number is farthest from the sun. Actual distances are not important for
game purposes. In the above sample, there are eight planets numbered 1
through 8.

PLANET DIAMETER
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A planet’s diameter is listed under “Dia” and is the diameter of the
planet in thousands of kilometers. Thus, in the above sample, planet #5
has a diameter of 14,000 kilometers. (For comparison, Earth has a
diameter of approximately 13,000 kilometers, and Jupiter has a diameter
of about 143,000 kilometers.)

PLANET GRAVITY
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A planet’s gravity is listed in the “Grav” column, and is given in
standard Earth gravities. Thus, Earth would have a value of 1.00. In the
above sample, a person standing on the surface of planet #4 would weigh
twice as much as on Earth.

TEMPERATURE CLASS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A planet’s temperature class is listed in the “Temp Class” column and
can have one of the values listed in Table \ `[tab:temp] <#tab:temp>`__

.. table:: Planet Temperature Class

   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | **Temp    | **Deg.    | **Example | **Temp.   | **Deg.    | **Example |
   | Class**   | (C)**     | s**       | Class**   | (C)**     | s**       |
   +===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+
   | 1         | -273      | Pluto,    | 16        | 180       |           |
   |           |           | absolute  |           |           |           |
   |           |           | zero      |           |           |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 2         | -240      | Mercury   | 17        | 210       |           |
   |           |           | (dark     |           |           |           |
   |           |           | side)     |           |           |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 3         | -210      | Neptune   | 18        | 240       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 4         | -180      | Titan     | 19        | 270       |           |
   |           |           | (moon of  |           |           |           |
   |           |           | Saturn)   |           |           |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 5         | -150      | Uranus,   | 20        | 300       |           |
   |           |           | Saturn    |           |           |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 6         | -120      | Jupiter   | 21        | 330       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 7         | -90       |           | 22        | 360       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 8         | -60       |           | 23        | 390       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 9         | -30       | Mars      | 24        | 420       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 10        | 0         |           | 25        | 450       | Venus     |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 11        | 30        | Earth     | 26        | 480       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 12        | 60        |           | 27        | 510       | Mercury   |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 13        | 90        |           | 28        | 540       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 14        | 120       |           | 29        | 570       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 15        | 150       |           | 30        | 600       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

The temperatures listed in the table are approximate, average
temperatures that can be experienced on the surface of the planet.
Colonies are more likely to prosper if the temperature class of a planet
is as close as possible to that of the home planet. If this is not the
case, life support technology will have to be applied to produce an
artificial environment for the colony.

PRESSURE CLASS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A planet’s pressure class is listed in the “Press Class” column and can
have one of the values listed in Table \ `[tab:press] <#tab:press>`__.

.. table:: Planet Pressure Class

   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | **Press.  | **Pressur | **Example | **Press.  | **Pressur | **Example |
   | Class**   | e**       | s**       | Class**   | e**       | s**       |
   +===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+===========+
   | 0         | 0.0000    | Mercury,v | 15        | 32        |           |
   |           |           | acuum     |           |           |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 1         | 0.0020    |           | 16        | 64        |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 2         | 0.0039    |           | 17        | 128       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 3         | 0.0078    | Mars      | 18        | 256       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 4         | 0.0156    |           | 19        | 512       |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 5         | 0.0312    |           | 20        | 1024      | Saturn    |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 6         | 0.0625    |           | 21        | 2048      |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 7         | 0.125     |           | 22        | 4096      |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 8         | 0.25      |           | 23        | 8192      |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 9         | 0.5       |           | 24        | 16384     |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 10        | 1         | Earth     | 25        | 32768     |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 11        | 2         | Uranus    | 26        | 65536     | Jupiter   |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 12        | 4         |           | 27        | 131072    |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 13        | 8         | Neptune   | 28        | 262144    |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
   | 14        | 16        | Venus     | 29        | 524288    |           |
   +-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

The pressures listed in the above table are multiples of Earth
“atmospheres” and are approximate, average values that can be
experienced on the surface of the planet. Colonies are more likely to
prosper if the pressure class of a planet is as close as possible to
that of the home planet. If this is not the case, life support
technology will have to be applied to produce an artificial environment
for the colony.

MINING DIFFICULTY
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A planet’s mining difficulty is listed under “Mining Diff”. Mining
difficulty is a relative figure-of-merit which indicates how difficult
it is to extract or utilize a planet’s natural resources. Higher values
represent greater difficulties. This value will be used to determine how
much raw materials can be produced on a planet during each game turn.

LIFE SUPPORT NEEDED (LSN)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The number in the column labeled “LSN” is the amount of Life Support
technology that your species needs to survive on the planet. If your
Life Support tech level is lower than this value, then your species may
not safely colonize the planet, and any attempt to colonize the planet
will result in the destruction of the colony. If your Life Support tech
level is equal to or greater than this value, then your species may
safely colonize the planet. We will discuss later how these values are
determined.

Keep in mind that these values apply only to the species that does the
scan. If you receive a scan from another player, the LSN values will
probably not apply to your species.

PLANETARY ATMOSPHERE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A planetary atmosphere will be described in terms of the gases that are
its major components. Each gas in the atmosphere will have a percentage
value associated with it. The gases and their symbols are used in this
game are listed in Table \ `[tab:gas] <#tab:gas>`__.

.. table:: Plantary Atmosphere Gases

   +------------+----------------------+
   | **Symbol** | **Name**             |
   +============+======================+
   | H2         | Hydrogen             |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | CH4        | Methane              |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | He         | Helium               |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | NH3        | Ammonia              |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | N2         | Nitrogen             |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | CO2        | Carbon Dioxide       |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | O2         | Oxygen               |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | HCl        | Hydrogen Chloride    |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | Cl2        | Chlorine             |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | F2         | Fluorine             |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | H2O        | Water Vapor or Steam |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | SO2        | Sulfur Dioxide       |
   +------------+----------------------+
   | H2S        | Hydrogen Sulfide     |
   +------------+----------------------+

For example, an Earth-type atmosphere would be described as N2(78%),
O2(22%). This means that Earth’s atmosphere consists of approximately
78% Nitrogen and 22% Oxygen.

FURTHER NOTES ON TEMPERATURE, PRESSURE, AND ATMOSPHERE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The temperature, pressure, and gaseous components of a planet are the
prime criteria by which you can decide if the planet is suitable for
colonization by your species. Furthermore, there are many possible
combinations, and finding a planet that closely matches your home planet
will not be easy.

For planets with a pressure class greater than about 20, the gases in
the atmosphere will usually condense into liquids, and will often even
solidify as you get closer to the surface. On these planets, there is
often no clear distinction between the atmosphere and the solid surface.
These planets are usually gas giants. Only the most intrepid and
advanced species would ever try to colonize the surface of such a planet
since it is so inherently hostile to life. Because of this, any colonies
that you do establish "on" such planets will actually be on moons
orbiting the planet, artificial satellites, etc.

If you wish to colonize or exploit a planet that is unsuitable for your
species, then some form of life support must be provided. This is where
your Life Support tech level will play an important part. A low value
for this technology will give you few options - you will have to search
longer and farther from home to find a planet that is suitable for
colonizing. As your Life Support tech level increases, you will have a
wider range of options.

Another possibility open to a species is to actually modify or
“terraform” the planet. This can be done by seeding the atmosphere with
specially designed micro-organisms, and by operating large plants on the
surface that will convert the atmosphere to something more suitable.
Both temperature and pressure classes can also be changed in this way.
However, terraforming is available only to species with relatively high
Biology tech levels.

SETTING UP FOR THE GAME
=======================

When a player is ready to enter the game, he must fill out a Set-up Form
and send it to the gamemaster. The form is in Appendix D. The following
sections explain how to fill it out.

TECH LEVEL POINT ALLOCATION
---------------------------

A starting player has a total of 15 points that can be allocated to
Military, Gravitics, Life Support, and Biology tech levels. Any
combination is allowable as long as they add up to 15.

A tech level can even be zero if you decide that your species has no
knowledge in that area. If Gravitics tech level is zero, then you may
only build sub- light ships. If your Life Support tech level is zero,
then none of your ships will have defensive shields. If a tech level is
zero, then it can only be raised if another species transfers the
knowledge to you. We’ll discuss how to do this later.

All species start the game with Mining and Manufacturing equal to 10.

SPECIES, HOME PLANET AND GOVERNMENT
-----------------------------------

Choose a name for your species. It can be something out of science
fiction or something you make up. Feel free to use your imagination!
Examples: Human, Kenda Jo, Klingon, Graxian, Jubjub Denboy, Ferengi, Mo
Ja’adebi, etc.

Choose a name for your home planet. Examples: Earth, Mars, Barsoom,
Dune, Giver of Life, Korunkorunkoruniman, Toi di Bai, etc.

Choose a name for your government or political system. Examples: The
United States of America, The Korun Federation, The Holy Alliance of
Denadan, The Jubjub Denboy Empire, etc.

All of the above names are limited to 31 characters and will be
truncated if they are longer. When referring to them later, case will
not be significant. Names may contain spaces and any printable
characters except commas and semi-colons. ALL characters in a name,
including spaces, are included in the 31-character limit. Names may NOT
contain tabs!

Name the type of government or political system of your species. (In
this game, we assume that all planets owned by a species are run by a
single government.) Be descriptive but limit yourself to 31 characters.
Examples: Libertarian Democracy, Communist Totalitarianism,
Constitutional Monarchy, Absolute Dictatorship, Benevolent Plutocracy,
Slaver Republic, Ruthless Oligarchy, Theocratic Monarchy, Military
Republic, etc.

The political system you choose could have an impact on the game, since
species may react to each other differently, depending on ideology.
Also, since Far Horizons is a role-playing game, the player should
always operate within the limitations imposed by the type of government
he chooses.

.. _sec:processingturns:

PROCESSING TURNS
----------------

After the gamemaster has received your set-up information, he will
either send you a map of the galaxy or he’ll tell you where you can
obtain a copy via ftp. He will also send you a status report which
contains a detailed description of your home planet and its production
capabilities. At the end of the status report, there will be an order
form that you can fill out for your first turn.

In the following sections, we will discuss these items in more detail.

.. _sec:starsysdata:

STAR SYSTEM DATA
----------------

The star system data sent to you for the first turn provides a detailed
description of the home star system. Refer to Chapter 2 if you have any
problem deciphering the information.

Star system data can be provided to you for every star system that your
species visits. However, you will not receive this information
automatically, but must specifically request a “scan”. This can be done
in the pre-departure or post- arrival section of the orders you send to
the gamemaster. (We’ll have more to say about the ‘scan’ command later.)

.. _sec:speciesstatusreport:

SPECIES STATUS REPORT
---------------------

This section of the information sent to you describes your species’
current situation. At the start of a game, you will not have any
planetary defenses, ships, etc. You start the game with a blank slate.
You DO, however, have mining and manufacturing capability which you can
start using immediately to build ships and other items.

Names of items that are available for use on a planet will be printed
out in full, along with their class abbreviation, required carrying
capacity, and quantity. For example:

.. math:: \textrm{Raw Material Units}(\textrm{RM},\textrm{C1}) = 17

 The above example indicates that the planet has 17 unused raw material
units, which require a carrying capacity of 1 each, and have the
abbreviation “RM”. (We’ll have more to say about raw material units and
carrying capacity later.)

Ages of ships and their orbital status will be indicated as in the
following example:

::

       CT Derby Dan (A5,O6)

Here, “CT” is the abbreviation for a corvette. “A5” indicates that the
age of the ship is 5 turns. The letter “O6” indicates that the ship is
in orbit around planet number 6 (as opposed to being landed on the
surface). If a ship is on the surface (i.e., “landed”), then “L” will be
used. If a ship is in deep space, not associated with any planet, the
letter “D” will be used. If a ship voluntarily withdrew from combat
during the strike phase, then “WD” will be used. If a ship was forced to
jump using Forced Jump Units during the strike phase, then “FJ” will be
used. If a ship is still under construction, then the complete
designation will be simply “(C)”. (We’ll have more to say about landing,
orbiting, and combat later.)

The rest of the status section is intended to be self-explanatory. It
indicates what your current Mining and Manufacturing Bases are and how
much you can produce in the current turn. (Abbreviations MI = Mining
Tech Level, MA = Manufacturing Tech Level, and MD = Mining Difficulty.)
How to use this data will be described later. The atmospheric
requirements and the list of gases poisonous and harmless to your
species will be used later in the game to decide whether or not other
planets are suitable for colonization. How to colonize planets will be
described later.

.. _sec:nomenclature:

NOMENCLATURE
------------

In order to make turn-processing as easy as possible for the gamemaster,
and to allow as much processing as possible to be done by the computer,
certain naming conventions have been established. Players should be
careful to follow these conventions carefully.

All items in the game have a 2-5 letter abbreviation. For example, heavy
cruisers use the designation “CA”, while starbases use “BAS”. These
class designations should ALWAYS be used when giving orders for the
items.

Ship and planet names are limited to 31 characters and will be truncated
if they are longer. Case is not significant. Thus, the following names
for a heavy cruiser are all the same:

::

       CA USS Enterprise
       ca uss enterprise
       CA USS ENTERPRISE

The particular upper/lower case combination that you use the first time
you name a ship or planet will be used in all subsequent reports. You
may use ANY combination, however, in subsequent orders.

Names may contain spaces and any printable characters except commas and
semi-colons. ALL characters in a name, including spaces, are included in
the 31 character limit.

.. _sec:miningandmanufacturing:

MINING AND MANUFACTURING
========================

In order to explore the galaxy, you will need spaceships, among other
things. The following sections will discuss how mining and manufacturing
are used to produce the items you will need.

.. _sec:rawmaterialunits:

RAW MATERIAL UNITS
------------------

As was mentioned earlier, Mining tech level does not apply strictly to
mining, but also includes such operations as drilling for oil, refining
metals, growing, harvesting, and processing crops, etc. In other words,
it is a generic term that covers all aspects of tapping a planet’s
natural resources. This technology is used to produce all of the raw
materials that, in turn, are used for final production. Thus, mining
technology produces raw materials and manufacturing technology consumes
them.

In FAR HORIZONS, quantities of raw materials are measured in RAW
MATERIAL UNITS. The number of raw material units that can be produced on
a planet in a single turn is:

.. math:: \textrm{Raw Material Units}  = \dfrac{\textrm{Mining Tech Level}  \times  \textrm{Mining Base}}{\textrm{Mining Difficulty}}

 MINING BASE is a relative measure of the total physical plant, acreage,
infrastructure, etc. that is available on the planet for the production
of raw materials. Thus, it is a measure of how many mines, farms,
drilling facilities, steel mills, etc that can be used by the planet’s
population.

For example, if your mining tech level is 4, your mining base is 136 and
the planet’s mining difficulty is 1.24, then you can produce

.. math:: \dfrac{4  \times  136}{1.24} = 438.71 = 438 \textrm{ raw material units}

 in the current turn. Note that fractions are always dropped. Since
current values are always shown on status reports that are sent to
players, it will NOT be necessary for players to do these calculations.

The mining base on all home planets will automatically increase by about
2% per turn. On colonies, however, the mining base can only be increased
by shipping in colonists and installing colonial mining units (we’ll
have more to say about this later). This, in fact, is how colonies are
actually started.

When referring to raw material units in orders which you send to the
gamemaster, use the abbreviation “RM”. We’ll have more to say about this
later.

Finally, unused raw material units may be carried over into later turns.
In effect, such carry-over is the equivalent of long term storage and
stockpiling.

.. _sec:productioncapacity:

PRODUCTION CAPACITY
-------------------

A species’ PRODUCTION CAPACITY is a measure of its ability to convert
raw material units into final products. Specifically, it is a measure of
the number of raw material units that may be converted into usable
products in a single turn. This value is determined as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Production Capacity}  =  \textrm{Manufacturing Tech Level}  \times  \textrm{Manufacturing Base}

MANUFACTURING BASE is a relative measure of the total physical plant
available on a planet for the conversion of raw material units into
final products. Thus, it is an indication of how many factories, dock
yards, processing plants, etc. that can be used by the planet’s
population.

For example, if manufacturing tech level is 6 and manufacturing base is
142, then

.. math:: \textrm{Production Capacity}  =  6  \times  142  =  852

in the current turn. Thus, the planet has the production capacity to
“consume” 852 raw material units and “purchase” 852 units of final
products. Since current values are always shown on status reports that
are sent to players, it will NOT be necessary for players to do these
calculations.

The manufacturing base on all home planets will automatically increase
by about 2% per turn. On colonies, however, the manufacturing base can
only be increased by shipping in colonists and installing colonial
manufacturing units (we’ll have more to say about this later).

Production capacity can only be utilized at its maximum if sufficient
raw material units are available. You cannot convert what you don’t
have. Furthermore, production capacity cannot be carried over into later
turns. If you don’t utilize your full production capacity, then it
simply means that your production facilities are not operating at full
capacity.

It is possible to use raw materials in the same turn as they are
produced. They do not have to be stockpiled in earlier turns. Thus, the
total number of raw material units available for manufacturing in the
current turn is the sum of what was carried over from the previous turns
plus what will be produced in the current turn.

.. _sec:production:

PRODUCTION
==========

At the end of each status report that you receive, there will be an
order form which you must fill out and send to the gamemaster. In it you
will provide your orders for the current turn. The form has sections for
combat orders, pre-departure orders, jump orders, production orders,
post-arrival orders, and strike orders.

At the start of a game, you will only be able to provide production
orders for one planet - your home planet. In later turns, you will need
to fill out orders for each planet on which you have production
capacity.

Production for each planet must be preceded by the order:

::

              PRODUCTION PL name

where ``PL`` is the class abbreviation for a planet and ``name`` is the
name of the planet. This command indicates that the orders that follow
apply only to the indicated planet. Orders for each planet must be
preceded by a PRODUCTION command.

Each section of the orders is started for you, and you must provide your
specific orders. For example, if your home planet is called "Earth", and
you have a colony called ``Mars``, the initial production section will
look something like this:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

       PRODUCTION PL Mars
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Mars here.

   END PRODUCTION

Note that some lines begin with a semi-colon. The semi-colon indicates
that the line is actually a comment and that the computer should ignore
it. You may add comments of your own. Comments may appear anywhere and
always start with a semi-colon. Everything on a line that follows a
semi-colon is ignored by the computer. Completely blank lines are also
ignored.

Each order begins with a command word, such as ``TRANSFER``,
``RESEARCH``, etc. These command words are not case sensitive and may be
truncated to just the first THREE letters. Any letters after the first
three are ignored. Thus, all of the following are equivalent to
``RESEARCH``: ``reS``, ``RESEA``, ``REsoQQQ``, etc.

When a name (such as the name of a ship or planet) is not the last item
on a line, it should be terminated by a comma. This is necessary because
names can contain spaces. Thus, in the following example, the name
``Laughing Dog`` is immediately followed by a comma:

::

         JUMP  CT Laughing Dog, PL Shangri La

Note though that ``Shangri La`` is NOT followed by a comma, since it is
the last item on the line.

WARNING! Omitting a required comma is one of the most common mistakes
made by players. It is also one of the most frustrating, since the
computer will reject the order.

You may use as many tabs and/or spaces as you wish to separate items in
a command to make it more readable. Tabs and spaces at the very
beginning of a command line are ignored. For example, the following are
valid orders:

::

         Orbit FF  Thomas Edison,      PL  Mars
         JUMP  PB  Benjamin Franklin,  12  7   18

Tabs, like commas, will terminate a name. However, use of commas is
recommended because tabs are not always easily visible. Any spaces that
appear in a name will become part of the name.

If a comment appears after an order on the same line, spaces and tabs
that precede the semi-colon are ignored. Thus, there is no need to
terminate a name with a comma if the name is immediately followed by a
comment. For example:

::

       Jump    TR7 Love Dove,  PL Mars    ;Deliver new colonists.

Note that ``Mars`` is not followed by a comma, and that the spaces
between ``Mars`` and the semi-colon will not be considered as part of
the name ``Mars``.

Any items that you may wish to build, such as ships, planetary defenses,
etc. will have a “cost” of equal amounts of raw material units and
production capacity. Thus, if you wish to build a spaceship with a cost
of 200, then a total of 200 raw material units will be used in its
construction, and a total production capacity of 200 will be needed to
actually build it.

Except for ships, all items must be built in a single turn. You can take
as many turns as you like to build ships. Thus, if we continue the above
example, you could build the ship in, say, 4 turns. You could allocate
100 raw material units and production capacity in the first turn, 70 in
the second turn, 0 in the third turn, and 30 in the fourth turn.

Finally, keep in mind that raw material units and production capacity
must always be spent in equal amounts. Thus, for example, if your
production capacity is greater than the number of raw material units,
then the excess may not be used. Also keep in mind that unused raw
material units MAY be carried over into later turns, but that unused
production capacity may NOT.

.. _sec:spaceships:

SPACESHIPS
----------

Spaceships come in all sizes as can be seen in
Table \ `[tab:ships] <#tab:ships>`__.

.. table:: Spaceship Classes in Far Horizons

   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | **Minim |         |         |         | **Carry |         |         |
   | um**    |         |         |         | ing**   |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | **MA**  | **Abbr* | **Class | **Tonna | **Capac | **FTL** | **Sub-l |
   |         | *       | **      | ge**    | ity**   |         | ight**  |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 2       | PB      | Picketb | 10,000  | 1       | 100     | 75      |
   |         |         | oat     |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 4       | CT      | Corvett | 20,000  | 2       | 200     | 150     |
   |         |         | e       |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 10      | ES      | Escort  | 50,000  | 5       | 500     | 375     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 20      | FF      | Frigate | 100,000 | 10      | 1000    | 750     |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 30      | DD      | Destroy | 150,000 | 15      | 1500    | 1125    |
   |         |         | er      |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 40      | CL      | Light   | 200,000 | 20      | 2000    | 1500    |
   |         |         | Cruiser |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 50      | CS      | Strike  | 250,000 | 25      | 2500    | 1875    |
   |         |         | Cruiser |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 60      | CA      | Heavy   | 300,000 | 30      | 3000    | 2250    |
   |         |         | Cruiser |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 70      | CC      | Command | 350,000 | 35      | 3500    | 2625    |
   |         |         | Cruiser |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 80      | BC      | Battlec | 400,000 | 40      | 4000    | 3000    |
   |         |         | ruiser  |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 90      | BS      | Battles | 450,000 | 45      | 4500    | 3375    |
   |         |         | hip     |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 100     | DN      | Dreadno | 500,000 | 50      | 5000    | 3750    |
   |         |         | ught    |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 110     | SD      | Super   | 550,000 | 55      | 5500    | 4125    |
   |         |         | Dreadno |         |         |         |         |
   |         |         | ught    |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 120     | BM      | Battlem | 600,000 | 60      | 6000    | 4500    |
   |         |         | oon     |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 130     | BW      | Battlew | 650,000 | 65      | 6500    | 4875    |
   |         |         | orld    |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
   | 140     | BR      | Battles | 700,000 | 70      | 7000    | 5250    |
   |         |         | tar     |         |         |         |         |
   +---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

::

``Minimum MA`` is the minimum Manufacturing tech level that a species
must have before it is capable of building a ship of the corresponding
tonnage. For example, a species must have a Manufacturing tech level of
40 or higher in order to be able to build a light cruiser.

``Abbr`` is the abbreviation that will be used for the corresponding
class of ship. The correct abbreviation must ALWAYS be used when making
reference to a specific ship. Thus, if you build a battleship named
``USS Iowa``, you must always refer to it as BS USS Iowa. You are free
to give your ships whatever names you wish, as long as you conform to
some simple naming conventions that will be discussed later.

``Tonnage`` is the ship’s fully loaded deadweight in long tons in
standard gravity. (Note that the maximum tonnage that a species can
handle is equal to 5000 times the Manufacturing tech level.)

``Carrying Capacity`` is the amount of cargo units or colonist units
units that a ship can carry. More will be said about this later. (Note
that carrying capacity is equal to the tonnage divided by 10,000.)

``FTL Cost`` is the number of raw material units and production capacity
needed to build a ship capable of interstellar travel (FTL stands for
“Faster-than- light”). (Note that the FTL cost is equal to the tonnage
divided by 100.)

``Sub-light Cost`` is the number of raw material units and production
capacity needed to build a ship that is NOT capable of interstellar
travel. These ships have all of the capabilities of the equivalent FTL
ship, except that they must either remain in the star system in which
they were constructed, or move very slowly from one sector to the next.
(Note that the sub-light ship cost is equal to the FTL cost minus 25%.)

To build ships, use the BUILD command, and be careful to use the correct
class abbreviation. For example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           ;Build sub-light frigate and pay for all of it now. Cost is 750.
           BUILD   FFS Farragut

           ;Build light cruiser. Pay one-quarter now (500) and the rest (1500)
           ; later...
           BUILD   CL      Guardian,       500

   END PRODUCTION

Note that if a payment amount is not specified, then the ship will be
completely built. The computer will calculate the needed cost. You will,
of course, have to keep track of the costs yourself to make sure that
you don’t try to spend more than what you have.

To continue construction on a ship, use the CONTINUE command, as in the
following examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           ;Pay 1250 more on the dreadnought we started a while back...
           CONTINUE        DN Dynamite Dan,        1250

           ;Finish the light cruiser we started last turn...
           CONTIN  CL      Guardian

   END PRODUCTION

If you do not specify the amount to spend, then the computer will
calculate the cost needed to finish construction.

NEVER use the same name for two different ships, even if their classes
are different. For example, if corvette ``CT Danny Boy`` already exists,
then an order to build frigate ``FF Danny Boy`` will fail.

.. _sec:combateffectiveness:

COMBAT EFFECTIVENESS
--------------------

In this section, we will digress slighlty and consider just how
effective the above-listed ships would be in combat situations.

In a game where each turn is five years long, any rules regarding combat
must, of necessity, be highly abstract. Furthermore, FAR HORIZONS is a
strategic game, as opposed to a tactical game. And since the game must
be played by mail, it is not possible for players to be directly
involved in the details of space combat. As a result, the outcome of all
battles must be determined by the gamemaster’s computer.

Whenever combat does occur, the computer will assign probabilities
defining each side’s offensive and defensive potentials. Offensive
potentials will depend most heavily on the numbers and sizes of the
ships (i.e. how much firepower is available) and their Military tech
levels (i.e. how effective their weaponry and tactics are). Defensive
potentials will depend most heavily on the sizes of the ships (i.e. how
much armor and defensive shield generators can be carried) and their
Life Support tech level (since the design of shields is an application
of life support technology).

MOST IMPORTANTLY, a single, large ship has MUCH more offensive and
defensive capability than several smaller ships of the same total
tonnage. For example, a single frigate (100,000 tons) could EASILY
destroy a fleet of five corvettes (20,000 tons each) or ten picketboats
(10,000 tons each) if tech levels are about the same.

Each battle will consist of one or more “rounds”, during which ships on
either side may be damaged or destroyed. The battle will proceed until
one side is destroyed or forced to leave.

Thus, the players will not be directly involved in determining the
outcome of a battle. Only the results of a battle will be reported to
them, on their status reports.

.. _sec:planetarydefenses:

PLANETARY DEFENSES
------------------

Planetary defenses are intended to protect a planet from attack by enemy
ships. They can attack and be attacked by ships in space near the
planet. A planet may not be controlled by an invading force until all
planetary defenses have been destroyed. Planetary defenses can also be
used in besieging a planet if they are on the planet that is under
siege.

In this game, we will not be concerned with the number, location or
strength of the individual bases and facilities that make up a planet’s
planetary defenses. If a planet is attacked, only the total planetary
defense strength is important.

Specifically, each planetary defense unit will have a cost of 1, and
will have the combat “value” of a 50 ton FTL warship. For example, if a
planet has produced 2000 planetary defense units (at a total cost of
2000), then it will have the same combat effectiveness as a 100,000 ton
frigate.

At first glance, it might seem that planetary defenses are not very
effective for the amount spent in their construction. Keep in mind,
though, that planetary defenses can grow without limit, becoming more
and more powerful at each step in their growth. Also, planetary defenses
are not limited in size by the species’ Manufacturing tech level, as
ships are. And, as we will see later, planetary defenses don’t suffer
from aging effects.

When referring to planetary defenses in orders, use the abbreviation
"PD". Each planetary defense unit requires a cargo capacity of 3.

To construct planetary defenses, use the BUILD command, as in the
following examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           Build   102 PD  ; Build 102 planetary defense units. Total cost = 102.

       PRODUCTION PL Vega VI
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Vega VI here.

           BUI     55 pd   ; Build 55 planetary defense units. Total cost = 55.

   END PRODUCTION

The units produced will remain on the producing planet unless they are
transferred elsewhere.

.. _sec:transports:

TRANSPORTS
----------

Transports are ships that are specially designed to carry colonists and
cargo. They CAN take part in combat, but their offensive and defensive
capabilities are about one-tenth that of warships. (As indicated in the
warship list above, warships also have carrying capacity, but it is much
less than a transport of the same tonnage.)

Transports can be built in any multiple of 10,000 tons. The maximum
tonnage, as for other ships, is 5000 times the Manufacturing tech level.

The carrying capacity of a transport is the total number of colonist
units or cargo units (or combination thereof) that a transport can carry
at any one time. Colonist units will be discussed later. A cargo unit is
the equivalent of one raw material unit. For example, a transport with a
carrying capacity of 200 could carry 90 colonist units and 110 raw
material units. Transports should use the class abbreviation "TRn",
where "n" is the tonnage divided by 10,000.

The carrying capacity of a transport is calculated as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Transport Carrying Capacity}  =  (10 + n/2) \times n

For example, a TR7 (i.e. a 70,000 ton transport) has a carrying capacity
of

.. math:: (10 + 7/2) \times 7 = (10 + 3) \times 7 = 91

 Note that fractions are dropped in the division.

.. table:: Transport example listing (this is not exhaustive)

   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | **Minimum** |          |             | **Carrying** |         |               |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | **MA**      | **Abbr** | **Tonnage** | **Capacity** | **FTL** | **Sub-light** |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 2           | TR1      | 10,000      | 10           | 100     | 75            |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 4           | TR2      | 20,000      | 22           | 200     | 150           |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 10          | TR5      | 50,000      | 60           | 500     | 375           |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 12          | TR6      | 60,000      | 78           | 600     | 450           |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 20          | TR10     | 100,000     | 150          | 1000    | 750           |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 30          | TR15     | 150,000     | 255          | 1500    | 1125          |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 40          | TR20     | 200,000     | 400          | 2000    | 1500          |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 100         | TR50     | 500,000     | 1750         | 5000    | 3750          |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | 120         | TR60     | 600,000     | 2400         | 6000    | 4500          |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+
   | …           | …        | …           | …            | …       | …             |
   +-------------+----------+-------------+--------------+---------+---------------+

Table \ `[tab:trans] <#tab:trans>`__ lists several example Transport
specifications. You may build a transport of any tonnage as long as it
is a multiple of 10,000, and as long as your Manufacturing tech level is
high enough. Note that you do NOT have to calculate the carrying
capacity of ships each time you give orders for the ships, since all
capacities are listed on your status reports.

To build transports, use the BUILD command, and be careful to use the
correct class abbreviation. For example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           ;Build sub-light transport and pay for all of it now. Cost is 750.
           BUILD   TR10S Barrel of Monkeys

           ;Build 40,000 ton transport. Pay one-quarter now (100) and the
           ;  rest (300) later...
           BUILD   TR4     Tummy Tunes,    100

   END PRODUCTION

Note that if a payment amount is not specified, then the ship will be
completely built. The computer will calculate the needed cost. You will,
of course, have to keep track of the costs yourself to make sure that
you don’t try to spend more than what you have.

To continue construction on a transport, use the CONTINUE command, as in
the following example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           ;Finish the 40,000 ton transport we started in the last turn.
           ;  Since we only paid 100 then, we must now pay 300.
           Cont    TR4     Tummy Tunes

           ; Pay an additional 500 on the 200,000 ton transport we started a
           ;  few turns ago.
           CON     TR20 Tunnel of Love, 500

   END PRODUCTION

NEVER use the same name for two different ships/transports, even if
their classes are different. For example, if frigate ``FF Danny Boy``
already exists, then an order to build transport ``TR8 Danny Boy`` will
fail.

.. _sec:moreonsublightships:

MORE ON SUB-LIGHT SHIPS
-----------------------

As mentioned above, sub-light ships have all of the capabilities of FTL
ships of the same tonnage. However, their cost is 25% less because they
do not have the engines that allow them to make interstellar jumps.
Thus, they are primarily intended for local use.

Sub-light ships should add the letter ``S`` to their class
abbreviations. For example, a sub-light frigate would have the class
designator ``FFS``, a sub-light 40,000 ton transport would use ``TR4S``,
etc.

.. _sec:starbases:

STARBASES
---------

Starbases are essentially floating fortresses. Unless towed, they cannot
move under their own power, but must remain in orbit around a planet.

Once construction has started, a starbase may be added to indefinitely.
However, the total tonnage cannot exceed the maximum tonnage allowed by
a species’ Manufacturing tech level. This limit is exactly the same as
for ships; i.e., the maximum tonnage of a starbase is 5000 times the
Manufacturing tech level.

Starbases are constructed in the same way as ships. The player simply
places an order for a starbase of a specific tonnage, or for additional
tonnage to be added to an existing starbase. The cost is the same as the
equivalent FTL ship tonnage; i.e., tonnage divided by 100. Starbases
must always be built or incremented in multiples of 10,000 tons. For
example, it would cost :math:`20,000/100 = 200` to built a starbase of
20,000 tons. To increase its tonnage to 50,000 tons would require an
additional cost of :math:`(50,000-20,000)/100=300`. Thus, the amount
spent must always be an exact multiple of 100.

A starbase built using the normal production capacity of a planet must
be built in orbit around that planet. (We will discuss another way of
building starbases later.)

The carrying capacity of a starbase is determined as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Starbase Carrying Capacity}  =   \dfrac{\textrm{Tonnage}}{1000}

 Overall, the combat effectiveness of a starbase is exactly the same as
a warship of the same tonnage. Thus, a 150,000 ton starbase and a
150,000 ton destroyer would fight as equals.

A starbase is not maneuverable and is thus a sitting duck. It is also
limited in its choice of targets. This, however, is compensated for by
more powerful shield generators and weaponry. Thus, it is probably best
to think of the tonnage of a starbase as an ‘effective’ tonnage rather
than an actual tonnage. The actual tonnage will almost certainly be much
higher. By using an effective tonnage in the game, we can easily compare
the combat effectiveness of starbases relative to other ships.

Starbases in orbit around a planet may be towed into orbit around
another planet in the SAME star system. It is not necessary to allocate
individual ships to do this - it is assumed that the starbase itself has
sufficient shuttlecraft to do it. In the same way, starbases may also be
towed up to one parsec per turn at sub-light speeds; i.e. to an
immediately adjacent sector. We’ll discuss how to do this later.

The class abbreviation "BAS" should always be used for starbases. For
example, you could refer to a starbase as BAS Deep Space 9 or BAS High
Guardian.

To build starbases, also use the BUILD command. Since starbases must be
built in increments of 10,000 tons (which has a cost of 100), anything
spent on building a starbase must be an exact multiple of 100. For
example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Bakupa
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Bakupa here.

           ;Build a new 20,000 ton starbase...
           BUILD   BAS     Misty Na Goba, 200

   END PRODUCTION

Note that a payment amount must ALWAYS be specified when constructing
starbases, and the amount must always be an exact multiple of 100.

To increase the size of an existing starbase, use the CONTINUE command,
as in the following examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Bakupa
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Bakupa here.

           ; Increase size of starbase by 40,000 tons...
           CONT    BAS Misty Na Goba,      400

   END PRODUCTION

NEVER use the same name for two different ships/starbases, even if their
classes are different. For example, if frigate "FF Danny Boy" already
exists, then an order to build starbase "BAS Danny Boy" will fail.

.. _sec:research:

RESEARCH
--------

Tech levels may be increased by spending equal amounts of raw material
units and production capacity on research. You may spend any amount you
wish on any or all tech levels. For example, you could spend 25 on
Military tech level and 433 on Biology tech level in a particular turn.

There is no guarantee, however, that research will result in an increase
in a tech level. The results of scientific research are never
predictable.

When a tech level increases, the increased knowledge is available for
use on all of the planets owned by the species. Thus, even though
research may be done on just one planet, its benefits are available to
the entire species.

There is no limit on how high a tech level can be, but in practice tech
levels are unlikely to exceed 100.

You may spend any amount on any tech level. The command to allocate
resources to research is RESEARCH. For example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Deneb VII
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Deneb VII here.

           ; Spend 27 on Biology research...
           RESEARCH 27 BI

           Res     1255    LS      ; Spend 1255 on Life Support research.

   END PRODUCTION

Use the abbreviations for tech levels listed in
Table \ `[tab:techabbrvs] <#tab:techabbrvs>`__.

.. table:: Technology abbreviations

   +----------+---------------+
   | **Abbr** | **Name**      |
   +==========+===============+
   | MI       | Mining        |
   +----------+---------------+
   | MA       | Manufacturing |
   +----------+---------------+
   | ML       | Military      |
   +----------+---------------+
   | GV       | Gravitics     |
   +----------+---------------+
   | LS       | Life Support  |
   +----------+---------------+
   | BI       | Biology       |
   +----------+---------------+

Spending on research does not guarantee success. In general, the more
you spend, the greater your chance of success will be, and the greater
the increase is likely to be. Keep in mind, though, that the process is
very unpredictable. Do not be disappointed if you spend a lot on
research but experience no increase in tech level, and do not be
surprised if you spend very little and experience a large increase.

It is also possible for a tech level to rise without spending funds on
research. This increase comes from research done by the private sector.
In effect, the government gets some technology for free, just as the
private sector gets technology for free as a result of government
research. In general, tech increases from the private sector will not be
very large, so you should not depend too much on them.

You may not raise a tech level using research, nor will you receive free
tech increases from the private sector, if your initial tech level is
zero. If a tech level is zero, you must first have the basics of the
technology taught to you by another species using the ``TEACH`` command.

We’ll have more to say about the ``TEACH`` command later.

.. _sec:economicunits:

ECONOMIC UNITS
--------------

It is expected that there will eventually be a thriving galactic
economy, with lots of trade taking place between species. This trade is
transparent to the player, who is primarily concerned with government
and military matters. Still, there must be a way to transfer wealth
between planets owned by one species and between different species, as,
for example, when one nation on Earth sends "aid" to another. In FAR
HORIZONS, this type of transfer is done using a special type of item
called an "Economic Unit".

Unlike other items, however, economic units are more like money or bank
balances, and may be transferred freely between planets without the need
for ships or cargo capacity. Economic units may even be transferred
between species.

In Far Horizons, each species has the equivalent of a bank account which
contains zero or more economic units.

If a species has economic units, they may be spent just as if each unit
were the equivalent of 1 raw material unit and a production capacity of
1. During production on a planet, economic units owned by the species
will be used automatically (if available) if orders are given which
require more than the available production capacity of the planet. For
example, if a planet can spend 500 using normal production, plus the
species has 150 economic units, then the planet can spend a total of 650
for construction of ships and other items. In other words, normal
production capacity will be used up first, and economic units will only
be spent if there is insufficient normal capacity.

However, there has to be a limit on how many economic units a colony can
spend. For example, it makes no sense to try to spend a large sum of
’money’ on a small colony. A small colony simply does not have an
economy that is robust enough to deal with large sums of ’money’.

So, in Far Horizons, the amount of economic units that a colony can
spend in addition to its normal production will be limited to what it
can produce on its own. For example, if a colony can spend 850 using
normal production, then it may ALSO spend up to 850 economic units from
the species’ treasury, for a total of 1700. Thus, the robustness of the
economy, measured by the amount of economic units it can spend, will
grow as the colony grows.

There is no limit to how much may be spent on a home planet.

Economic units may NOT be produced like other items using the BUILD
command. Instead, they are "produced" automatically on any planet that
has unused raw material units and an equal amount of unused production
capacity. The “cost” of one economic unit is 1 raw material unit and a
production capacity of 1. Thus, for example, if you need economic units
to give to another species, then simply do NOT spend an appropriate
amount on one or more planets.

Note that there is no need to explicitly transfer economic units between
planets that you control. Economic units owned by a species are
available for any planet that needs to spend them. Later, we’ll discuss
how to transfer economic units to another species.

.. _sec:upgrades:

UPGRADES
--------

The successful operation of ships and other items often depends on the
value of a particular tech level. For example, the effectiveness of a
ship in combat will depend heavily on its Military tech level. For game
purposes, everything will function at the current tech levels for the
species. This is unrealistic, but it makes bookkeeping much easier.

As a way of compensating for this lack of realism, ships and starbases
will also have an “age” associated with them. This age will be equal to
the number of turns that have passed since construction finished. For a
starbase, the effective age will be the weighted average of all of its
contributions. All other items, including planetary defenses, will not
experience any aging effects.

The age of a ship will affect its operation as follows: whenever an
operation has a certain probability of success, that probability will be
reduced by a percentage equal to 2 times the effective age. For example,
if a newly constructed ship has a 98.17% chance of hitting an enemy
target, then at the age of 9 turns, its chance of success for the same
shot would be 98.17 - (18% of 98.17) = 80.50%. When a ship reaches the
ripe old age of 49, it will remain at that age, apparently held together
by spit and glue. Obviously, a ship that has reached the age of 49 will
have a difficult time doing ANYTHING right!

In a similar way, the age will also affect the firepower of weapons and
the absorption power of shields.

Ages of ships and starbases will be listed in the status reports for the
species.

An item’s age may be reduced by having it upgraded (i.e., it will
undergo a retrofit). The amount of age reduction can be calculated with
the following formula:

.. math:: \textrm{Age Reduction}  =  \dfrac{40  \times  \textrm{Amount Spent}}{\textrm{Original Cost}}

 Fractions will be dropped.

Or, if you’d rather start with the age reduction, then the corresponding
cost can be determined using the following formula:

.. math:: \textrm{Cost of Upgrade}  =  \dfrac{\textrm{Desired Age Reduction}  \times  \textrm{Original Cost}}{40}

 If the result has a fraction, it should be rounded UP to the next whole
number. For a starbase, the original cost is considered to be the
current tonnage divided by 100.

For example, to completely upgrade an 80,000 ton transport that has an
effective age of 17 turns would cost :math:`(17 \times 800) / 40 = 340`,
and would reduce its effective “age” to zero. To reduce the age of a
70,000 ton starbase from 34 to 10 would cost
:math:`(34 - 10) \times 700 / 40 = 420`.

To upgrade a ship or starbase, use the ``UPGRADE`` command, as in the
following examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Nushki Pata Pata
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Nushki Pata Pata here.

           ;
           ; Let's keep that old light cruiser a little longer. If we spend 700,
           ;  we will reduce its age by 40 * 700 / 2000 = 14 turns.
           ;
           UPG CL Mighty Mouse, 700

           ; Rejuvenate that old destroyer from age 23 to age 0.
           upgr    DD Dawson       ; cost will be (23 x 1500)/40 = 863.

   END PRODUCTION

If you do not specify the amount you wish to spend in the upgrade
command, then the age will be set to zero and the cost will be
determined accordingly.

There is never a need to upgrade planetary defense units since they do
not experience aging effects.

A ship or starbase that is to be upgraded must be in the same sector as
the planet doing the upgrade, and the upgrade order must appear in the
production section for that planet. A ship cannot jump and be upgraded
in the same turn, since both jumping and upgrading require a complete
turn.

Finally, keep in mind that an upgraded ship will still get one year
older during the turn in which the upgrade is done. Thus, when you
receive the status report for the turn, the age of the above destroyer
will be 1, NOT 0.

.. _sec:recycling:

RECYCLING
---------

Most items may be recycled. When this is done, the item is effectively
sold on the open market, and an appropriate amount of ’money’ is added
to the treasury of the species. The amount received will depend on the
item that is recycled. Ships and starbases will have values that depend
on their age, while most other items can be cashed in for half of their
original cost.

Mining and manufacturing bases may NOT be recycled.

Recycling will add economic units to the balance for the species. For
items that do NOT suffer aging effects, the number of economic units
gained will be half the original cost (fractions will be dropped). The
only exception to this is for raw material units, which will be cashed
in at the rate 1:5 (for example, recycling 29 RMs will generate 5
economic units).

For ships and starbases, the amount of economic units generated will be:

.. math:: \dfrac{3  \times  \textrm{original cost}}{4}      \times \dfrac{(60 - \textrm{age})}{50}

If a ship is still under construction, it may be recycled for half of
what has already been spent on it. If a ship is carrying cargo, the
cargo will first be transferred to the planet before the ship is
recycled (cargo, if any, is NOT automatically recycled).

To recycle ships, starbases and other items, use the RECYCLE command, as
in the following examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Knock Out
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Knock Out here.

           ; Let's recycle some stuff we don't need...
           ;
           ; Get rid of those old corvettes.
           ;
           RECYCLE         CT      Dragon
           recycle         CT      Princess
           ;
           ;Next, I don't need so many planetary defense units...
           ;
           rec     20 pd

   END PRODUCTION

If colonist units or planetary defense units are recycled, the available
population for the planet will be increased by the number of units
recycled. This will allow you to convert ``CU``\ s to ``PD``\ s or
vice-versa.

Recycling is a good way to get rid of old, unreliable ships and
starbases. It is also good for getting rid of excessive amounts of raw
material units.

An item, ship, or starbase that is to be recycled must be on the planet
or in orbit around the planet, and the recycle order must appear in the
production section for that planet. Economic units generated by a
RECYCLE command may be spent in the same turn. Make sure, though, that
the recycle command precedes any other commands that will spend the
money obtained by recycling.

A ship cannot jump and be recycled in the same turn, since both jumping
and recycling require a complete turn.

.. _sec:recycleorupgrade:

RECYCLE OR UPGRADE - WHICH IS BEST?
-----------------------------------

An important decision that players will have to make is whether to
upgrade a ship or to recycle it. There are several things to keep in
mind when making this decision:

a. A large warship is much more effective in combat than several smaller
   warships of the same total tonnage. This is a strong incentive to
   recycle smaller warships, and use the proceeds to build larger ones.

b. Recycling is more cost effective as a ship gets older, but the aging
   effects could have a serious negative impact on the ship’s operation.
   In purely financial terms, the crossover age is about 15 turns; i.e.,
   the fractional financial return from recycling is the same as the
   fractional remaining useful lifetime when the age of the ship is
   about 15 turns.

c. Starbases require such a long time investment, that it is never
   worthwhile to recycle them. In general, they should always be
   upgraded. The only time you can justify recycling a starbase is if
   you are forced to do so by an enemy, or if it was intended originally
   for only temporary use.

d. You may want to keep smaller, non-intimidating ships (such as small
   transports) for exploration or spying. Thus, upgrading a small number
   of these could be advantageous.

So, as a general rule-of-thumb, it’s a good idea to recycle warships and
transports of 40,000 tons or more when they reach the age of about 15.
If you’re willing to sacrifice a small amount of the financial return
for a little more security, then recycle when the ship is slightly
younger, say 10 or 12 turns old.

Starbases should almost always be upgraded. Recycle them only when you
have no choice or when you no longer need them.

Small warships and transports (less than 40,000 tons) are great for
exploration and spying, and you may want to continually upgrade a few of
them. Recycle only if you have more than you need. If you explore or spy
with anything bigger (especially large warships), the aliens you visit
may consider it a hostile act.

Another thing to keep in mind is player tedium. Providing orders for
lots of small ships can be a real pain in the neck. Also, the more ships
you have, the more likely it will be that you’ll make mistakes.

Finally, keep in mind that the above are just guidelines. The
“personality” of the species that you are role-playing can definitely
impact your strategy. And, as in any role-playing game, you should
always role-play your species correctly, even if “correct” means “less
efficient” or “less practical”.

.. _sec:buildingotheritems:

BUILDING OTHER ITEMS
--------------------

To build items other than ships and starbases, also use the ``BUILD``
command, but specify the number of items you want and their class
abbreviation. Here are some examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           build   7 PD    ;Add seven planetary defense units...
           BUI 50 CU       ;Train and equip 50 colonist units...

           Build   3 jp    ; Build 3 jump portal units.

   END PRODUCTION

We’ll have more to say later about “colonist units” and “jump portal
units”. Always be careful to use the correct class abbreviations in ANY
orders.

.. _sec:fleetmaintenancecost:

FLEET MAINTENANCE COST
----------------------

Manning and maintaining ships and starbases is not free, and costs can
be especially high for military vessels. To reflect this reality, each
species will be required to pay a “fleet maintenance cost”.

The fleet maintanance cost will be calculated by the computer and listed
on your status report. The base cost for all military ships will be the
tonnage divided by 500, the base cost for starbases will be the tonnage
divided by 1000, and the base cost for transports will be the tonnage
divided by 2,500. Sub-light ships will receive a 25% discount. For
example, it will cost 400 per turn to maintain a 200,000 ton light
cruiser, 60 per turn to maintain a 150,000 ton TR15, and 750 per turn to
maintain a 500,000 ton sub-light dreadnought. The full cost must also be
paid for ships that are still under construction. After calculation of
the total base cost, a discount will be applied equal to the current
military tech level divided by 2, used as a percentage (drop fractions).
For example, if your military tech level is 27, then you will receive a
13% discount. In this way, those species that “specialize” more heavily
in military technology will be able to operate their fleets more
efficiently.

The computer will calculate the percentage of the total production of
all planets that is needed to pay the fleet maintenance cost, and will
subtract that percentage from the total amount available for spending on
each planet. Thus, the player will NOT have to do any calculations at
all - the cost will be automatically deducted from the production of
each planet. Here is an example of how the cost and deductions will
appear on your status reports:

For the entire species, you will see a line like this:

::

   Fleet maintenance cost = 926 (7.34% of total production)    \end{verbatim} 

   \noindent For each planet, you will see a line like this:

       \begin{verbatim}
   Total available for spending this turn = 2278 - 167 = 2111  

where the portion of the fleet maintenance cost that is being paid by
this planet is 167 (i.e. 7.34% of 2278).

If the fleet maintenance cost is greater than the total production of
all of your planets, then the percentage will be greater than 100. If
this occurs, then as much of the cost as possible will be paid using any
economic units in the treasury. If the remaining cost is still greater
than total production, the amount over 100% will be the percent chance
of civil unrest, riots, and destruction of infrastructure. In other
words, the population will get very upset if the military budget becomes
too excessive.

.. _sec:movement:

MOVEMENT
========

As soon as you have finished constructing at least one ship, you will be
able to give movement orders in the movement sections of the order form.
Jump orders can be given only for ships and items that are listed in the
status report for the current turn. You may not give jump orders for
items that will be produced in the current turn. Other movement orders
for newly constructed ships may be given immediately after production,
in the post- arrival section of the order form.

Movement orders are of four types: jump orders, transfer orders, landing
and orbiting orders, and sub-light move orders. These orders are
described below.

.. _sec:jumporders:

JUMP ORDERS
-----------

Jump orders are given when a ship must be moved to a different star
system. These orders should use the ``JUMP`` command. Here are some
examples:

::

   START JUMPS
   ; Place jump orders here.

           jump PB Benjamin Franklin, 12 7 18
           JUMP    FF      Thomas Edison, PL Mars

   END

For the destination, use the name of a planet in the destination star
system whenever possible. If you mistype a planet name, the computer
will report an error which the gamemaster may be able to fix. However,
if you mistype “x y z” coordinates, the ship will arrive at the wrong
destination, if it arrives at all.

If a planet name is used, then the ship will automatically go into orbit
around the planet when it arrives. If X Y Z coordinates are used, the
ship will remain in the deep space part of the sector, even if the
sector has planets.

If a ship or starbase is located at a terminus of a natural wormhole,
then it may use the wormhole to travel to the other terminus. To do
this, use the WORMHOLE command, as in the following examples:

::

   START JUMPS
   ; Place jump orders here.

           Wormhole        TR10 Praying Mantis
           WORM    BAS Deep Space 3, PL Danbury
           Wor     FFS Farragut
           Worm            BC Tanid's Sword, PL Vega III

   END

Note that this is the only way that a starbase can “jump” to a different
sector at FTL speeds.

If an optional planet name is specified, then the ship or starbase will
enter orbit around the planet when it arrives at the other end of the
wormhole. Otherwise, it will remain in deep space. (Obviously, if a
planet is specified, then it must be located at the same X Y Z
coordinates as the other end of the wormhole.)

When a location is scanned (discussed later), the scan will indicate if
a wormhole is present, but it will not indicate the coordinates of the
other end of the wormhole. The only way to determine the other endpoint
is to actually use the wormhole, as described above.

Natural wormholes are absolutely stable. There is no chance of a
mis-jump or self-destruction when using one, regardless of the distance
traveled.

.. _sec:transferorders:

TRANSFER ORDERS
---------------

Transfer orders use the ``TRANSFER`` command, and are used to move items
to and from ships and planets in the same sector. They must be given in
the pre- departure or post-arrival sections of your orders.

Transfers between planets in the same sector do not require the use of
specific ships. It is assumed that there are sufficient shuttlecraft
available. For example:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           TRANSFER 100 RM PL Earth, PL Mars

   END

In effect, the ``TRANSFER`` command is used to transfer goods between
any two entities that are capable of holding them, as long as the
transfer occurs within a sector. Here are some more examples:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           TRAN 50 RM PL Earth, BAS Earth Orbit 3
           tra     2 RM    FF Gibbon,      CA Embassy
           TRANSFER 100 RM BAS Earth Orbit 2, BAS Mars Orbit 1
           Tran    50 PD   PL Earth, Pl Mars

   END

If a planet is the source or destination in a transfer, the planet name
MUST be used - coordinates may NOT be used!

There is no limit to the number of ``TRANSFER`` commands that a ship or
planet can be given in a single turn.

A special note must be made about the ``TRANSFER`` command. There is a
possible situation in which colonists and supplies could be transferred
to a new colony immediately after a jump. If the planet is already
inhabited by another species, neither species will know about the new
colony until the next turn. To prevent this very unrealistic kind of
incident, a ``TRANSFER`` to a planet may only be made in the
post-arrival phase IF the planet is already inhabited by the species
making the transfer. Otherwise, the transfer will have to be done in the
pre-departure phase of the next turn. Once the colony has been
established, you may ``TRANSFER`` goods to the planet in either the
pre-departure or post-arrival phases.

An optional feature of the ``BUILD`` command that was not discussed
earlier allows the player to provide a destination for the items that
are built. Here are some examples:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Enter your production orders for planet Earth here.

           ; Build 120 colonist units and transfer them to a transport.
           Build   120 CU  TR6 Belly Laugh

           ; Build 150 planetary defense units and transfer them to the colony
           ;  on Mars.
           Bui     150 PD  PL Mars

   END PRODUCTION

If the optional destination is a planet, then it must be in the same
star system as the producing planet. If the optional destination is a
ship, then the ship must be in the system BY THE END OF THE TURN. In
other words, a ``BUILD`` command with an optional destination is exactly
equivalent to a ``BUILD`` command in the production section of the
orders, followed by a ``TRANSFER`` order in the post-arrival section. If
the destination does not have sufficient cargo capacity, then only items
for which there is sufficient capacity will be transferred. All item
transfers will be logged on the status report. And since this optional
feature cannot have any destructive or irreversible consequences, no
error message will be posted if the transfer fails or is incomplete. If
the transfer cannot be made, then the produced items will simply remain
on the planet.

If you attempt to auto-transfer items to another planet in the same
sector, and at least one of the planets is under siege, then the
transfer will be ignored. If a planet is under siege, you MUST use a
separate ``TRANSFER`` command. Also, keep in mind that post-arrival
``TRANSFER``\ s will only work if the destination planet is already
populated.

.. _sec:landorbitdeep:

THE “LAND”, “ORBIT”, AND “DEEP” COMMANDS
----------------------------------------

The ``LAND``, ``ORBIT``, and ``DEEP`` commands are used for moving ships
within a star system. The ``LAND`` command indicates that the ship
should land on the surface of a planet. The ``ORBIT`` command indicates
that the ship should enter orbit around a planet. The ``ORBIT`` command
can also be used to have a starbase towed from orbit around one planet
into an orbit around another planet in the same star system. The
``DEEP`` command may be used to move a ship that is currently landed or
orbiting into deep space. A ``DEEP`` order may NOT be given for a
starbase. ``LAND``, ``ORBIT``, and ``DEEP`` orders may be given in
either the pre-departure or post- arrival section of your orders.

Examples:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Land    FF Don Quixote, PL Mars 
           ORB BAS Hurdy Gurdy,    PL Jupiter
           DEEP    DD Jeopardy
   END

The destination in a ``LAND`` or ``ORBIT`` can be a planet number or a
planet name. (We will discuss how to name planets later.)

In FAR HORIZONS, ships that are given JUMP commands of the form
``JUMP X Y Z`` do not actually land on a planet or go into orbit around
a planet. Instead, they are simply located somewhere in the star system,
and we refer to this “somewhere” as ‘deep space’. Also, movement within
a star system is considered to be trivially easy in FAR HORIZONS. Thus,
there is no movement penalty or advantage to being in deep space, in
orbit around a particular planet, or landed on a particular planet.

However, there is one circumstance where being landed on a planet can
provide an advantage. If a ship owned by another species visits the
system, it will detect ships in orbit or in deep space, but NOT ships
that have landed on a planet that is populated by your species. In
effect, the population of your colony or home planet can "hide" your
ships from prying eyes. Ships that are under construction are always
automatically hidden in this way. However, if another species also has a
colony on the same planet, then your ships cannot be hidden from them.

The ``LAND`` command will allow you to land a ship on one of your
populated planets, thus hiding it from alien view. The ``ORBIT`` command
will allow you to place a landed ship in orbit, thus intentionally
making it visible to others. Here are some more examples:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

   ; Move the little corvette from the surface of Mars to Earth orbit for the
   ;  Klingons to see.
           orb     CTS Jiminy Cricket, PL Earth
   ; But, don't let them see our big ships...
           LAND    DN Faragut, PL Earth
           Lan     BS Wellington, PL Mars

   END

A ``LAND`` or ``ORBIT`` command may only be issued to a ship that is in
the same star system as the planet. A ship does not already have to be
at the planet when a ``LAND`` or ``ORBIT`` command is given - it just
has to be in the same sector.

When you give a JUMP order of the form ``JUMP ship, PL name``, the ship
will automatically go into orbit around the planet.

For the purposes of this game, a ship cannot land on uninhabited
planets. [Actually, it is certainly possible for ships to land on
uninhabited planets, but it does not perform a useful game function, and
so it is not allowed.] Also, in general, you may not land your ships on
a planet that is not inhabited by your species, even if it IS inhabited
by one or more other species. The only exception to this is if a species
that inhabits the planet has declared you as an ``ALLY``. (We’ll have
more to say about the ``ALLY`` command later.)

If you want to land your ship on a planet that is inhabited by another
species that has declared you as an ``ALLY``, you must use a planet
number rather than a planet name in the ``LAND`` order, even if you have
given a name to the planet. Here are some examples:

::

           Land    TR5 Jabberwocky, 5  ; One of our allies has a colony on
                                 ;  planet 5.

           LAN     FF Kharsh Dukh, 3.  ; Let's see if they coinsider us an
                                 ;  ally.

If there is at least one species that has population on the planet and
that has declared your species as an ``ALLY``, then your ship will be
allowed to land. If you are allowed to land by one or more species, then
all of those species will be notified that they granted you permission
to land. If you are not allowed to land by ANY species, then all species
that have population on the planet will be notified that they denied you
permission to land.

If your star system is attacked, ships on the surface of a planet will
react just as quickly as ships in orbit or in deep space. In other
words, there is no advantage or disadvantage to being on the surface, in
orbit, or in deep space. A ship does not have to be in orbit or on the
surface to load or unload goods. A newly constructed ship will remain on
the surface until told otherwise. If you land a ship on a planet that is
populated by both your species AND by one or more other species, then
the other species WILL detect your ship, even though it has landed. In
other words, if a planet is colonized by more than one species, then ALL
ships on the planet will be detected by ALL species that populate the
planet, even ships that are still under construction. The same is true
for planetary defenses.

Finally, if you do not specify a planet name or number in a ``LAND`` or
``ORBIT`` command, the computer will check if the ship is already
orbiting or landed on a planet. If so, it will use that planet. For
example:

::

   START JUMPS
   ; Place jump orders here.

           Jump    DD Defiant, PL Earth
   END

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           Land    DD Defiant
   END

The above ``LAND`` command will land the ship on PL Earth.

.. _sec:mishapprobabilities:

MISHAP PROBABILITIES
--------------------

Whenever a ship jumps from one star system to another, there is always a
chance of a mishap. This section is provided for those players who would
like to know the actual probabilities involved.

The percentage probability that something will go wrong is:

.. math:: \textrm{Mishap Probability}  =  \dfrac{\textrm{Distance}^2}{\textrm{Gravitics Tech Level}}

 The result is in percent. For example, if the distance is 7 parsecs and
the Gravitics tech level is 4, then the mishap probability is
:math:`(7 x 7)/4 = 12.25\%`. Note that the result is significant to two
places after the decimal point.

If a mishap does occur, then the result will be either a mis-jump or
self- destruction. When a mishap does occur, a second check is made
using the same probability. If the second mishap also occurs, then the
ship self-destructs.

Finally, don’t forget that all success/failure probabilities are further
affected by the age of a ship. The probability calculated above is for a
ship whose effective age is zero.

.. _sec:movecommand:

THE MOVE COMMAND
----------------

It is possible for a ship or a starbase to travel up to one parsec per
turn at sub-light speeds. The ship can be either sub-light or FTL. It is
assumed that a starbase is towed by its own shuttlecraft.

To do this, use the ``MOVE`` command. ``MOVE`` orders may only be issued
in the jump section of your orders. Here are some examples:

::

   START JUMPS
   ; Place jump orders here.

           Move    BAS Sneakers, 5 12 17
           MOV     CC Ornery, 17 16 11
           mov     DDS Victory, 22 31 15

   END

Only one coordinate (X, Y, or Z) may change, and it may not change by
more than +/-1. Here are some examples:

::

           Okay:   from 15 16 21 to 15 16 22       Z increased by 1
                   from 21 5 7 to 20 5 7           X decreased by 1
                   from 31 15 15 to 31 16 15       Y increased by 1

           Wrong:  from 15 16 21 to 15 17 22       Y and Z both increased by 1
                   from 21 5 7 to 19 5 7           X decreased by 2
                   from 31 15 15 to 30 16 15       X decreased by 1 and Y
                                                    increased by 1

The move requires a full turn. Thus, a ship or starbase can only be
given one MOVE order per turn.

Since sub-light travel does not involve use of a wormhole, there is no
danger of mis-jumps or self-destruction.

.. _sec:colonization:

COLONIZATION
============

One of the goals of most players will be to create colonies in other
star systems as well as in their home system. How this is done will be
explained in this chapter.

.. _sec:generalconsiderations:

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
----------------------

Before a colony can be established, a suitable planet must be found. The
three major criteria used to determine the suitability of a prospective
planet are its temperature class, its pressure class and the
constituents of its atmosphere. If any of these three criteria differ
considerably from those of the home planet, then a considerable amount
of life support expertise will be required if the colony is to survive.

Once a suitable planet has been found, the colony can be started by
shipping in colonists and the supplies and equipment they will need to
set up the colony. In its early stages, a colony will grow mainly by
constant infusions from the home planet or other larger colonies, since
its population will be too low to grow much on its own. Eventually,
though, the colony’s population will become large enough that additional
people and materials will no longer have to be shipped in from
elsewhere.

In general, you may NOT set up a colony on your own home planet or on
the home planet of another species. However, you MAY colonize the home
planet of another species after you have completely destroyed the
population by means of germ warfare or orbital bombardment (discussed
later). You may also re-colonize your home planet up to its former
highest economic base if it was reduced by bombardment of germ warfare.

This rule is designed to prevent three unrealistic situations: 1.
Building a colony on your own home planet so that you can increase your
mining and manufacturing bases above the 2% limit per turn; 2. Doing the
same on someone else’s home planet; 3. Sneaking onto someone else’s home
planet and installing a colony before they can stop you.

I doubt if anyone would ever want to do number 3, unless it was an act
of pure mischief, but numbers 1 and 2 are ways of getting around the 2%
growth limit, and might appeal to players who like to ’cheat’ by taking
advantage of loopholes in the rules.

.. _sec:determiningsuitability:

DETERMINING A PLANET’S SUITABILITY FOR COLONIZATION
---------------------------------------------------

A colony may only be started if the Life Support tech level of the
species is high enough to handle the prevailing conditions at the
planet. If the Life Support tech level is not high enough, then a colony
may not be started. Use the following guidelines to determine how much
life support is actually needed:

a. If the single gas required by the species is not present in the
   required range, 3 points of life support will be needed.

b. If the atmosphere has any gases poisonous to the species, 3 points of
   life support will be needed for EACH poisonous gas.

c. For every point of difference between the home planet’s temperature
   class and the colony’s temperature class, 3 points of life support
   will be needed.

d. For every point of difference between the home planet’s pressure
   class and the colony’s pressure class, 3 points of life support will
   be needed.

The minimum Life Support tech level needed to allow creation of the
colony is the sum of all the above contributions. For example, consider
the following data:

::

           Home:   tc=10 pc=10     NH3(29%),N2(47%),O2(24%)
           Colony: tc=9  pc=12     H2S(46%),O2(54%)

           Atmospheric Requirement: 14%-54% O2
           Gases Poisonous to Species: HCl,Cl2,SO2,H2S,Fl2,CH4
           Gases Harmless to Species: He,H2,H2O,NH3,N2,CO2

The requirement for O2 is just barely met, so no life support is needed
for it. However, the colony has one poisonous gas, H2S, so 3 points of
life support will be needed. The temperature class difference is 1, so 3
points of life support are needed. Finally, the pressure class
difference is 2, so 6 points of life support will be needed. Thus, a
total of :math:`0+3+3+6 = 12` points of life support are needed. If the
Life Support tech level of the species is 12 or higher, then the colony
may be started.

Finally, extremely large planets, such as gas giants, are so hostile to
life that nothing can survive on the surface. However, these planets
typically have large numbers of satellites (i.e. “moons”) which can be
colonized instead. Thus, for planets such as these, we can think of the
life support requirements as ’averages’ for the entire planet and its
system of satellites. It is for this reason also that the gravity of a
planet is not a consideration.

.. _sec:startingthecolony:

STARTING THE COLONY
-------------------

In order for a colony to be of any use, it must have people, raw
materials, and production capacity. In FAR HORIZONS, these needs have
been met by implementing the items in
Table \ `[tab:coloitems] <#tab:coloitems>`__.

.. table:: Required items for colonization

   +----------+------------------------------+------+-------------------+
   | **Abbr** | **Name**                     | Cost | Carrying Capacity |
   +==========+==============================+======+===================+
   | CU       | Colonist Units               | 1    | 1                 |
   +----------+------------------------------+------+-------------------+
   | IU       | Colonial Mining Units        | 1    | 1                 |
   +----------+------------------------------+------+-------------------+
   | AU       | Colonial Manufacturing Units | 1    | 1                 |
   +----------+------------------------------+------+-------------------+

A colonist unit is the approximate equivalent of 1000 humans.

Colonist units, colonial mining units, and colonial manufacturing units
are used to establish the initial mining and manufacturing bases on a
colony planet. Units are installed as follows:

.. math:: 1 \text{ colonist unit} + 1 \textrm{ colonial mining unit} = 0.1 \textrm{ mining base}

.. math:: 1 \textrm{ colonist unit} + 1 \textrm{ colonial manufacturing unit} = 0.1 \textrm{ manufacturing base}

 In other words, a colonist unit consists of trained people, ready and
willing to work. A colonial mining unit or a colonial manufacturing unit
contains the supplies and equipment they will need to do the particular
job.

After colonial mining and manufacturing units have been transported to a
new colony, they must be installed; i.e., they are used to create new
mining and manufacturing bases, or to increase existing bases. The
installation is started in the pre-departure section of the orders, but
requires the entire turn to complete.

Note that colonist units, mining units, and manufacturing units must be
ON the planet before they can be installed. Thus, they must be
transferred from the ships that brought them to the planet’s surface
before they can be installed. Furthermore, items may only be transferred
to a planet that has a name. For this, use the NAME command. For
example:

::

   NAME 12 3 9 4   PL Epsilon Eridani IV   

The above example will give the name “Epsilon Eridani IV” to the fourth
planet of the star system at coordinates X=12, Y=3, Z=9. Note that the
abbreviation for planet ``PL`` is required. (In FAR HORIZONS, names
ALWAYS require use of the appropriate class abbreviation. There are no
exceptions.)

WARNING! One of the most common player mistakes is to accidentally omit
a required abbreviation. In Far Horizons, ALL ships and items have
abbreviations, and ALL orders that refer to them must use the required
abbreviation. If not, the computer will reject the order.

After colonial units have been transferred to the planet using the
``TRANSFER`` command, they may be installed with the ``INSTALL``
command. Here’s a complete example involving the ``NAME``, ``TRANSFER``,
and ``INSTALL`` commands:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Name    13 24 7 3       PL Dickory Dock

           Tra     50 cu   TR5 No-one Here, PL Dickory Dock
           Tra     22 iu   TR5 No-one Here, PL Dickory Dock
           Tra     28 au   TR5 No-one Here, PL Dickory Dock
           Inst    22 iu   PL Dickory Dock    ; Mining base will be 2.2
           INst    28 au   PL Dickory Dock    ; Manufacturing base will be 2.8
   END

Make sure that sufficient colonist units (``CU``\ s) are present on the
planet before installing the mining units (``IU``\ s) and manufacturing
units (``AU``\ s) that will need them. Also, orders to transfer units to
the planet will NOT automatically install them. If you do not give
specific installation orders, the units will simply sit on the planet’s
surface.

In other words, when you give an order to install 22 ``IU``\ s, you are
telling the computer to combine 22 ``CU``\ s and 22 ``IU``\ s and
increase the mining base of the planet by exactly 2.2. When the order is
executed, the computer will reduce the number of ``CU``\ s and ``IU``\ s
by 22 each, and will increase the mining base by exactly 2.2.

Alternatively, you can use the ``UNLOAD`` command, as in the following
example:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Name    13 24 7 3       PL Dickory Dock

           Orbit   TR5 No-one Here, PL Dickory Dock

           Unload  TR5 No-one Here
   END

This command will transfer all ``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, and ``AU``\ s on
the ship to whatever planet it is located at (orbiting or landed). After
the transfer, it will then automatically install as many mining and
manufacturing units as it can, starting with mining units, and including
any colonist units, mining units, and manufacturing units that were
already on the planet.

The ``ORBIT`` command was required in the above example because the
planet was just named, and there was no way that the transport could
have already been in orbit around the planet. If the planet had been
named in an earlier turn, and if the transport had jumped directly to
the planet, then it would have automatically orbited the planet and the
above ``ORBIT`` command would not have been necessary.

A special note must be made about the ``TRANSFER`` command. There is a
possible situation in which colonists and supplies could be transferred
to a new colony immediately after a jump. If the planet is already
inhabited by another species, neither species will know about the new
colony until the next turn. To prevent this very unrealistic kind of
incident, a ``TRANSFER`` to a planet may only be made in the
post-arrival phase IF the planet is already inhabited by the species
making the transfer. Otherwise, the transfer will have to be done in the
pre-departure phase of the next turn. Once the colony has been
established, you may ``TRANSFER`` people and goods to the planet in
either the pre- departure or post-arrival phases.

.. _sec:availablepop:

AVAILABLE POPULATION
--------------------

As a colony grows, its population will increase by normal means. This
population will be listed on status reports as a number of ‘available
population units’. This population can then be used as follows:

   If a colony builds planetary defense units or additional colonist
   units, they will also have an equivalent cost in ’available
   population units’. For example, to create 17 planetary defense units
   on a colony will reduce the number of available population units by
   17.

In other words, before you can “build” colonist units or planetary
defense units, you must first have enough people to hire and train for
the job. Thus, you can think of ’available population’ as equivalent to
the number of population units that are available for hire. This number
will be relatively low on colonies, but will be much higher on the home
planet.

The number of available population units that are currently ’for hire’
on each planet will be listed in your status reports.

Note that the above rules do NOT apply to ships or other items built on
a colony planet. In other words, building ships does not have an
equivalent “cost” in colonist units. (Crewing requirements are
considered to be insignificant. Very large ships may require large
crews, but small colonies will not have the resources and production
capacity to build such ships.)

.. _sec:populationgrowth:

POPULATION GROWTH ON COLONY PLANETS
-----------------------------------

In general, colonial populations increase at a much higher rate than on
the home planet. In this game, we will use a base figure of 10% per
turn. This value will be modified downwards depending on how hostile the
planet is to your species.

If your Life Support tech level is exactly equal to the Life Support
needed to colonize the planet, then the colony will experience no
growth.

At the opposite extreme, if no life support is needed, then population
growth will be 10% (plus or minus small random fluctuations).

Any new growth is converted to ‘available population units’, which you
can then use to BUILD colonist units (``CU``\ s) or planetary defense
units (``PD``\ s).

The actual growth will be calculated by the gamemaster’s computer, and
the current total population and available population will be listed in
the status report for each planet.

Finally, unused available population will NOT carry over into later
turns if they are not used to ``BUILD`` ``CU``\ s or ``PD``\ s. Instead,
the people will either find other jobs locally, or will give up in
disgust (because they can’t find jobs) and will look for better
opportunities off-planet. This approach will prevent unrealistic
accumulations of "idle" population.

.. _sec:miningcolonies:

MINING COLONIES
---------------

If a colony has a mining base that is greater than zero, but its
manufacturing base is exactly zero, then it will be considered a ‘mining
colony’. A mining colony has the following special features:

#. A mining colony will never produce ‘available population’. The only
   way to increase the population is by bringing in colonists and
   installing colonial mining units.

#. Raw material units produced each turn on the mining colony will be
   automatically “sold” and converted to economic units (3 raw material
   units = 2 economic units, fractions dropped). In other words, the
   number of economic units generated will be two-thirds of the number
   of raw material units that are “mined”.

#. As raw materials are extracted from a mining colony, the mining
   difficulty of the planet will gradually rise. The rise in mining
   difficulty will be proportional to the amount of material mined. Note
   that this increase in mining difficulty occurs ONLY on mining
   colonies.

Economic units generated by a mining colony cannot be spent on the
mining colony itself (except for the ``HIDE`` command, discussed later).
Instead, they are automatically added to the balance for the species.
They may be spent in the same turn on other planets only if the
``PRODUCTION`` order for the mining colony appears before ``PRODUCTION``
orders for the planets where the economic units will be spent.

Thus, mining colonies allow a species to take advantage of planets that
are rich in resources but which are not suitable for normal life. The
raw material units that they generate are automatically converted to
cash which can then be spent on producing planets.

A mining colony is a better investment than a normal colony as long as
the mining difficulty is less than 1.50. When the mining difficulty
becomes greater than 1.50, the return on investment becomes less than
for a normal colony. Thus, it’s a good idea to convert a mining colony
to a normal colony (by installing colonial manufacturing units) when the
mining difficulty approaches 1.50.

.. _sec:resotcolonies:

RESORT COLONIES
---------------

If a colony has a manufacturing base that is greater than zero, a mining
base that is exactly zero, a gravity less than or equal to the home
planet, and requires less than 6 points of life support technology, then
it will be considered a ‘resort colony’. A resort colony has the
following special features:

#. A resort colony will never produce ’available population’. The only
   way to increase the population is by bringing in colonists and
   installing colonial manufacturing units.

#. Each turn, the production capacity of a resort colony will be
   automatically converted to economic units at a rate of three-to-two.
   In other words, the number of economic units generated will be two-
   thirds of the production capacity. For example, if the production
   capacity is 40, then it will be automatically converted to 26
   economic units.

Economic units generated by a resort colony cannot be spent on the
resort colony itself. Instead, they are automatically added to the
balance for the species. They may be spent in the same turn on other
planets only if the ``PRODUCTION`` order for the resort colony appears
before ``PRODUCTION`` orders for the planets where the economic units
will be spent.

Thus, resort colonies allow a species to take advantage of planets that
are especially suitable for life but which may have a high mining
difficulty. Their effective production capacity is automatically
converted to cash which can then be spent on producing planets.

One of the most common mistakes that players make is to ignore the
gravity of a planet when trying to create a resort colony. The gravity
MUST be less than or equal to the gravity of the home planet.

.. _sec:hiddencolonies:

HIDDEN COLONIES
---------------

It is possible to hide a colony from detection by aliens. This is done
by using special shielding, conducting as much activity as possible
underground, delaying or reducing activity when aliens are in the
system, using evasive tactics, and so on. However, hiding a colony is
expensive and it reduces the overall efficiency of the colony.

In Far Horizons, you may indicate that a colony is to be hidden by
placing a ``HIDE`` order in the production section of your orders, as
follows:

::

   HIDE    

The command takes no arguments.

The ``HIDE`` command will last only for the current turn. If you wish to
permanently hide a colony, then you must issue the ``HIDE`` command each
turn.

The cost of hiding is the sum of the mining and manufacturing bases of
the colony at the beginning of the turn. For example, if the most recent
status report shows that a colony has a mining base of 25.7 and a
manufacturing base of 29.2, then the cost of hiding the colony will be:

.. math:: 25.7 + 29.2  =  54.9  =  54

 Note that fractions are dropped.

You may not hide a resort colony or a home planet. You may only hide
normal colonies and mining colonies. (In fact, a ``HIDE`` order is the
only production order that may be given to a mining colony.) Also, you
may not hide a planet that is under siege (discussed later).

When a colony is hidden, it will not be listed on the status reports of
other species that are in the same star system. Ships under construction
and any ships that have landed on the planet will also be undetected.
However, starbases and ships in orbit WILL be detected. Also, the colony
WILL be detected by a species that has population on the same planet.

If you suspect that a planet has a hidden colony, you can detect the
colony by transferring planetary defense units or colonist units to the
surface during the pre-departure phase of the turn. However, they must
remain on the surface until at least the next turn in order to detect
the hidden colony.

You MAY hide a colony that has population on it (i.e. colonist units
and/or planetary defense units) but which does not have any installed
mining or manufacturing bases. Since the total installed base is zero,
the cost is also zero. However, you will have to provide your own
``PRODUCTION`` order for the planet.

.. _sec:colorattritionlosses:

COLONY ATTRITION AND LOSSES
---------------------------

When a new colony is started, it is normal to expect losses to be
relatively heavy compared to later in its development. This
higher-than-normal casualty rate will have several causes: unfamiliar
flora and fauna, unpredictable climate, unexpected geological phenomena
such as earthquakes and volcanoes, and so on. In addition, very small
colonies cannot replace these losses through new births because their
population is too small. For example, extremely small colonies must
avoid the potentially harmful effects of inbreeding, which can greatly
restrict their growth rate.

In Far Horizons, we will simulate the losses that can be expected in
very small colonies as follows:

   If the total population of a colony is less than 50 population units
   (about 50,000 people), then there will be a fixed loss of exactly 1
   population unit (about 1000 people) per turn. If the total population
   is at least 50 population units, then no loss will occur.

This reduction in population will occur at the end of every turn,
immediately after normal population growth. Thus, if the colony
experiences a natural increase in population, there will be no net loss.

The reduction will take place as follows:

   | If the number of available population units is greater than zero,
   | then it will be reduced by one;

   | otherwise, if the number of colonist units on the planet is greater
     than zero,
   | then it will be reduced by one;

   | otherwise, if the number of planetary defense units on the planet
     is greater than zero,
   | then it will be reduced by one;

   | otherwise, if the manufacturing base of the planet is greater than
     zero,
   | then it will be reduced by 0.1;

   otherwise, the mining base of the planet will be reduced by 0.1.

Obviously, if a planet has no population at all, then it will not
experience any reduction.

A reduction in colonist units, planetary defense units, mining base, or
manufacturing base will be indicated on the status report. Reduction in
available population units will not be mentioned.

.. _sec:productionpenalty:

THE PRODUCTION PENALTY
----------------------

A colony that has a Life Support tech level that is barely sufficient to
survive will not be useful for much else. If, for example, the tech
level needed to survive is 27 and the actual tech level is also 27, then
the colony is on the borderline between extinction and survival. We
certainly cannot expect such a colony to be very productive, no matter
how large its mining and manufacturing bases. Instead, the entire output
of the planet’s mining and manufacturing bases would be needed just to
survive. If, however, the tech level needed is much less than the actual
tech level, then the colony would be able to thrive and be very
productive.

In Far Horizons, we simulate this reality with what is called a
“production penalty” that will apply to all planets. The penalty will
depend on the actual Life Support tech level of the species (``LS``) and
the tech level needed to survive on the planet (``LSN``). The production
penalty is calculated as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Production Penalty}  =  \dfrac{100  \times  \textrm{Life support tech level needed}}{\textrm{Life support tech level}}\textrm{percent}

For example, if the ``LSN`` value for the planet is 9 and the ``LS``
value for the species is 36, then production capacity and raw material
production will each be reduced by 25%. If ``LS`` equals ``LSN``, then
the production penalty is 100%, and nothing at all will be available for
spending - the entire output of the planet’s mining and manufacturing
bases will be needed just to survive.

The penalty will apply to all planets, including mining colonies,
manufacturing colonies, and even the home planet. However, since the
life support tech level needed on the home planet is zero, the penalty
will also be zero. (The only way this could change is if the home planet
is terraformed by another species. We’ll have more to say about
terraforming later.)

The penalty will be calculated by the computer and printed on your
status reports, along with the net production values. Although you will
not have to do any additional calculations, you should always keep the
penalty in mind when deciding on which planets to colonize.

.. _sec:warfare:

WARFARE
=======

Since FAR HORIZONS is a role-playing game, it is quite possible for a
species to choose to be peaceful, and to live harmoniously with all of
its neighbors. Unfortunately, its neighbors may not be similarly
inclined...

.. _sec:preparingforbattle:

PREPARING FOR BATTLE
--------------------

Before a battle can begin, you must specify its location. This is done
with the ``BATTLE`` command. For example:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

       ;The following combat orders will be for the attack on the Romulan home
       ; planet in their star system at 12 4 3...
           BATTLE  12 4 3

           additional combat orders follow the BATTLE order

   END

Note that only the X, Y and Z coordinates are given. Any planets that
are to be involved will depend on later commands. A ``BATTLE`` command
MUST be specified before any other combat orders that will apply to the
specified location. In effect, a ``BATTLE`` command states that a battle
MAY take place at the specified location, and that all of your forces at
that location are on alert. A single ``BATTLE`` command may be followed
by other combat commands, and all such commands will apply to the
location specified in the most recently executed ``BATTLE`` command.
Thus, if you are attacking more than one star system in a turn, then
each set of combat orders will be preceded by an appropriate ``BATTLE``
order.

.. _sec:combat:

COMBAT
------

To indicate your intentions at a battle, use one or more ``ENGAGE``
commands. Each ``ENGAGE`` command requires an “option” argument to
indicate the nature of the engagement you are willing to take part in.
Some also require an additional argument which specifies the planet
where the option will apply. You may specify more than one ``ENGAGE``
command per battle. Here are your options:

0
   - Defense in-place. Do not attack anyone unless they are clearly
   hostile. If fighting does start, fight only if the battle moves to
   your current location. If battle moves to a new location, do not move
   with it. This is the default option if you do not provide any
   ``ENGAGE`` orders.

1
   - Deep space defense. Do not fight unless the opponent is clearly
   hostile. If a fight is inevitable, try to keep the battle away from
   your planets. This option should be used if you have planets you wish
   to defend and you wish to keep the battle away from them to avoid
   damage to civilians and civilian structures. (Remember, “deep space”
   is anywhere in a star system that is not within fighting range of a
   planet.)

2
   - Planet defense. This option requires an additional argument
   indicating the planet you are willing to defend. This command should
   be given for each planet you wish to defend.

3
   - Deep space fight. Attack the enemy in deep space and destroy as
   many ships as possible. If the enemy is not willing to meet you in
   deep space, then no battle will take place. (Remember, “deep space”
   is anywhere in a star system that is not within fighting range of a
   planet.)

4
   - Planet attack. This option requires a second argument to indicate
   the number of the planet that you wish to attack. This type of attack
   will do as much damage as possible to military targets, while
   minimizing damage to civilians and infrastructure. With this option,
   an attacker will have to contend with starbases, planetary defenses,
   and ships on the ground or in orbit.

5
   - Planet bombardment. This option requires an additional argument to
   indicate the number of the planet that you wish to attack. Start with
   a planetary attack. After you have successfully destroyed all of the
   enemy’s ships, starbases, and planetary defenses, bombard the
   specified planet doing as much damage as possible to the population
   and infrastructure.

6
   - Germ warfare. This option requires an additional argument to
   indicate the number of the planet that you wish to attack. Start with
   a planetary attack. After you have successfully destroyed all of the
   enemy’s ships, starbases, and planetary defenses, attempt to destroy
   all enemy life on the planet using germ warfare.

7
   - Besiege planet. This option requires an additional argument to
   indicate the number of the planet that you wish to attack. Start with
   a planetary attack. After you have successfully destroyed all of the
   enemy’s ships, starbases, and planetary defenses, besiege the planet
   and extort ’taxes’.

If you give an ``ENGAGE`` order whose option is 3 or greater, you must
also specify the name or names of the enemy you want to fight with. For
this, use the ``ATTACK`` command. For example:

::

        Attack  SP Klingon
        ATT SP Romulan

The above says that you will attack two species: the Klingons and the
Romulans. Note that you must issue a separate ``ATTACK`` command for
each species that you wish to attack.

You also have the option of attacking all species that you have declared
as enemies using the ``ENEMY`` command (discussed later). To do this,
give the ``ATTACK`` command a zero argument, as in the following
example:

::

   ATTACK   0    ; Attack all declared enemies at this battle location.    

If you want to attack both enemies and non-enemies, then give the above
order plus specific ``ATTACK`` orders for the non-enemies.

If you do not give specific orders to attack other species, then you
will not attack them unless they attack you.

It is not possible for a battle to take place if only transports are
being engaged. In order for a battle to occur, at least one participant
must have at least one warship, starbase, or planetary defense unit at
the engagement location.

Now, if there are other species at the battle location that you are NOT
attacking, but they have declared as ``ALLY`` a species that you ARE
attacking, then they will fight in the battle on the side of their
``ALLY``. In other words, the effect will be the same as if you had
given ``ATTACK`` orders for them and they for you.

EXAMPLE #1: Several Romulan ships appear in sector 4 12 3 where you (the
Humans) have two colonies (planet #4 and #7). You’re not sure if they
will attack, and you would prefer not to fight. Also, if they do attack,
you want to keep them away from your colonies to avoid civilian deaths
and destruction of mining and manufacturing capacity. Here are the
combat orders you should give:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

           BATTLE  4 12 3
             ENGAGE        1       ;Try to keep fight, if any, away from
                                   ; colonies.
             ENGAGE        2 4     ;Protect planet \#4.
             ENGAGE        2 7     ;Protect planet \#7.

   END

EXAMPLE #2: You are the Romulan visitors of the preceding example. Your
goal is to attack the Humans at planet 4 and destroy all defenses there.
If this succeeds, you then want to attack planet 7, and destroy its
defenses. Finally, if everything goes well up to this point, bombard
planet 7 (but NOT planet 4). Here are the orders you should give:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

           Battle  4 12 3

             Attack        SP Human

             Engage        4 4     ;Attack planet \#4 and destroy its defenses,
                                   ; but do NOT try to destroy civilians and
                                   ; infrastructure.

             Engage        5 7     ;Attack planet \#7 and destroy its defenses,
                                   ; then try to wipe out the population and
                                   ; infrastructure by bombarding the planet.
   END

If you want to attack the enemy in deep space and still protect your
planets, then provide an ``ENGAGE 2`` command for each planet you wish
to defend, and also provide an ``ENGAGE 3`` command. In other words, you
definitely want to fight, but you also want to keep the battle away from
your planets for as long as possible.

If a defending species provides orders to engage an attacker in deep
space, but the attacker has orders to attack a planet, then the
following will apply:

   If the defender has a higher military tech level than the attacker,
   then N rounds of combat will occur in deep space before the battle
   moves to the planet, where N is the difference in Military tech
   levels. Otherwise, only one round will occur in deep space.

For example, if the Fizians (Military tech level = 22) wish to attack
the Jubwa (Military tech level = 27) home planet, but the Jubwas want to
keep the battle away from the planet for as long as possible, then
:math:`27-22 = 5` rounds of combat will occur in deep space. Starting
with the 6th round, the battle will be at the Jubwa home planet
(assuming the Fizians can still fight).

When a planet is attacked, considerable damage can also be done to non-
combatants and to surface structures. This damage will be indicated on
status reports by reductions in mining and manufacturing bases.

In the following sections, we will discuss some of the above options in
more detail.

.. _sec:annihilation:

ANNIHILATION
------------

After an attacker has destroyed all of the defender’s ships, starbases,
and planetary defenses, he may choose to attempt to annihilate the
population. This can be accomplished in two ways: by heavy bombardment
from space, or by the use of germ warfare.

When attacking a planet by bombarding it from orbit, the actual damage
done will depend on the number and combat capability of the attacking
ships, and on the population and infrastructure of the now-defenseless
planet. If sufficient power is applied, then the defenders can be
completely destroyed. As a rough rule-of-thumb, a fleet of ten
unenhanced Strike Cruisers (250,000 tons each) with a military tech
level of 50 will have sufficient firepower to wipe out the entire
population and infrastructure of a heavily populated planet.

Germ warfare is used when the attacker wishes to ensure complete
annihilation of the defender. It is most useful if the attacker does not
have or may not have sufficient firepower to annihilate the population
and infrastructure by means of bombardment. It is also useful if the
planet is rich and the attacker wants to loot it after destroying the
inhabitants.

Germ warfare is carried out by the use of high tech devices called “Germ
Warfare Bombs”, and the results will depend on the relative Biology tech
levels of the attacker and defender. Germ warfare bombs will be
discussed in more detail later.

If germ warfare is used to successfully wipe out the population of a
planet, then the planet may be colonized by someone else (such as the
attacker) in the next turn. However, the original mining and
manufacturing bases are lost. Instead, the planet is looted by the
attackers and the resulting economic units are added automatically to
the balance for the attacking species. (It is assumed that the direct
transfer of the planet itself from the defender to the attacker is
impractical because they are completely different species; that is,
mining and manufacturing bases for the two species are not compatible.
However, some of the original wealth of the defenders is obtained by
looting.)

Note that germ warfare may not be successful, and the outcome will
depend on the relative Biology tech levels of the two species.
Bombardment, however, will always do some damage.

If a home planet is bombed, it may be recolonized by the original
inhabitants, even if the damage was only minor. However, the final
economic base that results from any installations cannot exceed the
original base. (In the case of multiple bombings, the highest base at
any time during the bombings will be considered the original base.) When
the base eventually reaches its original value, the home planet will be
considered fully recovered. During recovery, the amount that may be
spent on a bombed home planet will be limited, and the available
population will be less than normal.

.. _sec:siege:

SIEGE
-----

After an attacker has destroyed all of the defender’s ships, starbases,
and planetary defenses, he may choose to besiege the planet and make the
inhabitants pay ‘protection money’ or ’taxes’. In effect, the attacker
is blackmailing the planet, saying “give us money or we will destroy
you”.

The effectiveness of a siege will depend on the size of the planet’s
economy and the number and sizes of ships that take part in the siege.
And since siege is an inherently military operation, it will also depend
on the relative Military tech levels of the opponents. An effectiveness
rating will be calculated as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Effectiveness}  =  \dfrac{\textrm{Total ship tonnage}  \times  \textrm{ML of attackers}}{\textrm{Production base}  \times  (\textrm{ML of defenders} + 1)}

.. math:: \textrm{Production base}  =  (\textrm{MI} \times \textrm{Mining Base})  +  (\textrm{MA} \times \textrm{Manufacturing Base})

If a ship besieges more than one planet in a sector, then its
effectiveness will be divided by the number of planets that it is
besieging.

Since a starbase does not have the maneuverability of a normal ship, it
will have an effective tonnage that is one quarter of its actual
tonnage. Transports will have NO effectiveness at all in a siege. Also,
if the besieging species has planetary defense units on the planet that
is being besieged, then they will contribute to the effectiveness of the
siege in proportion to the equivalent ‘tonnage’ of the defenses.
However, planetary defense units on the surface of a planet are MUCH
more effective against a defeated population than against attacking
enemy ships above the planet. To reflect this, each planetary defense
unit will have an equivalent tonnage of 2000 tons FOR SIEGE PURPOSES
ONLY; i.e. forty times more effective than when attacking enemy ships.
Finally, planetary defenses may not conduct a siege by themselves. The
besiegers must also have at least one warship or starbase taking part in
the siege to provide orbital support.

The effectiveness will be used as a percentage to determine the amount
of production lost by the besieged planet. The maximum effectiveness is
95%. Also, 25% of the lost production will be converted to economic
units and transferred to the besieging species. (The remaining 75% is
considered lost due to inefficiency, civil unrest, sabotage, reduced
interplanetary and interstellar trade, the cost of maintaining the
siege, etc.)

For example, if the effectiveness is 37 and the planet can spend 1205 in
production for the turn that it is under siege, then the planet will
only be able to spend :math:`1205 - 37\%` of :math:`1205 = 760`. In
addition, 25% of the amount lost will be automatically transferred to
the species that is conducting the siege. In the above example, 37% of
1205 is 445, and 25% of 445 is 111. Thus, the besieger will receive 111
economic units. If more than one species besieges the planet, then the
amount will be divided among them according to the relative
effectiveness of each species.

The effectiveness will also be used to determine if the besieger detects
and prevents the construction of ships and planetary defense units by
the besieged species. For example, if the effectiveness is 37%, then
there is a 37% chance that the besieger will detect if any ship
construction occurs. If so, the ship will be destroyed. Similarly for
planetary defense units.

A species that is under siege maintains complete control of his planet,
and may give any orders that make sense. However, some orders may not
succeed because of the siege. Here are the basic rules that apply to
sieges:

#. Any attempt to build a starbase on a beseiged planet will ALWAYS be
   detected, and the starbase WILL be destroyed.

#. Any construction on a ship, even partial construction, MAY be
   detected as described above. If so, the ship will be destroyed before
   it can be used.

#. Any construction of planetary defense units MAY be detected as
   described above. If so, all units on the planet will be destroyed
   before they can be used.

#. Any items other than ships, starbases, and planetary defense units
   can be built without fear of detection.

#. Any attempt to transfer items between the planet under siege and a
   different planet in the same star system MAY be detected as described
   above. If so, the items will be destroyed.

#. Besiegers will not detect transfers of economic units to other
   species.

#. Any attempt to secretly land a ship on a besieged planet MAY be
   detected as described above. If a landing is detected, the besiegers
   will be notified of the landing, but will not otherwise see the ship
   on their status reports. The player that owns the ship will be told
   one of the following: a. the landing WAS detected; b. the landing was
   NOT detected; or c. the landing MAY have been detected.

Besieging ships must remain in the system for the entire turn. Any ships
that jump out of the system voluntarily or which are forced to jump away
during combat will not take part in the siege.

Keep in mind that you may not ``BUILD`` and auto-transfer items to
another planet in the same sector if either planet is under siege.
Instead, you must use the ``TRANSFER`` command. Also keep in mind that
post-arrival ``TRANSFER``\ s will only work if the destination planet is
already populated.

A player that controls a planet that is under siege or which may be
placed under siege should keep in mind that some of his production may
be stolen by the enemy. Thus, production orders should be listed in
order of importance. Items will not be built if there are insufficient
funds. For example, if your planet is successfully attacked and besieged
at the beginning of the turn, then a percentage of your production will
be lost. Only the remainder will be available for you to spend. Keep
this in mind if your system is ’visited’ by a potential enemy.

A player that wishes to maintain a siege for more than one turn MUST
provide appropriate battle orders EVERY turn, just as if the siege were
being attempted each turn. At the beginning of each combat phase, the
gamemaster’s computer effectively ‘forgets’ about any previous sieges.

.. _sec:occupation:

OCCUPATION
~~~~~~~~~~

Even though Far Horizons does not have any special rules that deal
exclusively with ‘occupying’ a planet of another species, it IS possible
to achieve a very realistic kind of occupation using the existing rules.
Consider the following scenario:

   SP Good Guys and SP Bad Guys each have a colony on the 2nd planet of
   the star system at 7 14 23. At the beginning of the turn, the Bad
   Guys have several warships in the system, plus planetary defense
   units at their colony. If the Bad Guys want to ’occupy’ the colony of
   the Good Guys, they could give the following orders:

   ::

                  START COMBAT
                  ; Place combat orders here.
                      Battle  7 14 23
                      Attack  SP Good Guys
                      Engage  7 2 ; Attack and attempt to besiege
                                  ;  planet 2.
                  END

If the Bad Guys are successful at eliminating the ships and defenses of
the Good Guys, then the siege will commence. Furthermore, the planetary
defense units in the Bad Guy colony will add to the overall
effectiveness the siege. This is especially important since planetary
defense units are much more effective at siege than at fighting ships
above the planet.

Now, since at least one ship or starbase is needed to maintain a siege,
the Bad Guys can build a small starbase at the colony during the
production phase of the turn (if they do not already have one). They can
also build lots of additional planetary defense units to help maintain
the siege. In effect, they have ’occupied’ the colony of the Good Guys.
Still another option would be to build sub-light warships. This approach
will release the FTL warships for duty in other star systems.

Note that it’s perfectably acceptable for the Bad Guys to specify planet
#2 in an ATTACK order, even though there is a Bad Guy colony on the
planet. The computer will never allow a species to attack itself
(unless, of course, you decide to commit suicide and give an ATTACK
order against your own species).

Now, consider another scenario:

   SP Good Guys have a colony on the second planet of the star system at
   7 14 23. SP Bad Guys do NOT have a colony on the planet, but they
   would like to conquer and ’occupy’ the Good Guy colony. So, in the
   previous turn, several warships AND TRANSPORTS jumped to the colony.
   The transports contain colonist units, mining units, and
   manufacturing units. The Bad Guys can now give the following orders:

   ::

                  START COMBAT
                  ; Place combat orders here.
                      Battle  7 14 23
                      Attack  SP Good Guys
                      Engage  7 2             ; Attack and attempt to besiege
                                              ;  planet 2.
                  END


                  START PRE-DEPARTURE
                  ; Place pre-departure orders here.
                      Name 7 14 23 2  PL Revenge
                      Transfer CUs, IUs, and AUs from transports to PL Revenge
                      Install IUs and AUs on PL Revenge
                  END

The above orders will start a new Bad Guy colony if the Bad Guys win the
battle. If the bad guys lose, then the ``TRANSFER`` and ``INSTALL``
orders will be ignored by the computer, since the transports will have
been destroyed.

Now, consider a third scenario:

   SP Good Guys have a colony on the second planet of the star system at
   7 14 23. SP Bad Guys do NOT have a colony on the planet, but they
   would like to conquer and ’occupy’ the Good Guy colony. So, in the
   previous turn, several warships AND TRANSPORTS jumped to the colony.
   The transports contain lots of planetary defense units. The Bad Guys
   can now give the following orders:

   ::

                  START COMBAT
                  ; Place combat orders here.
                      Battle  7 14 23
                      Attack  SP Good Guys
                      Engage  7 2             ; Attack and attempt to besiege
                                              ;  planet 2.
                  END

                  START PRE-DEPARTURE
                  ; Place pre-departure orders here.
                      Name 7 14 23 2  PL Revenge
                      Transfer PDs from transports to PL Revenge
                  END

If the Bad Guys win the battle, the above orders will start a new Bad
Guy colony that contains ONLY planetary defense units. If the Bad Guys
bring enough ``PD``\ s, then the ``PD``\ s can contribute significantly
during the subsequent siege.

The above approaches are very realistic ways of effectively ‘occupying’
a planet inhabited by another species. The planetary defenses of the
besieger play the role of an occupying army, while at the same time
defending the colony of the occupier. If the siege has a high
effectiveness rating, then the besieged species is in a quandry,
especially if it has no hope of outside help. Also, keep in mind that
it’s very difficult to hide a partially constructed ship from the
besieger. Since the besieger has people on the same planet, the chance
of detecting ship and PD construction will be 95%, regardless of the
actual siege effectiveness.

.. _sec:assimilation:

ASSIMILATION
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Another very real kind of occupation can occur if the besieger actually
lives on the besieged planet, shipping more and more of their own
colonists there as time goes on. Eventually, the original population
becomes ’assimilated’.

It is not realistic for a species to assimilate an entire home planet,
since the population to be assimilated is simply too large. (Consider
the failed Cardassian occupation of the Bajoran home world in the Star
Trek stories.) However, it should be possible to assimilate the
population of a colony. Something similar is actually happening today,
here on Earth. For example, the Indonesians have essentially occupied
and are now assimilating the people of East Timor, while the Chinese are
doing the same in Tibet. In situations such as these, a relatively small
occupying population is in complete control of a much larger native
population because the occupiers control all of the weapons, the
government, industry, communications, the economy, and so on, while
continually shipping in more and more of their own people.

In Far Horizons, a colony will be considered ‘assimilated’ if the
besieging species has a colony on the same planet, if the total
population of the besieging species is more than 20 percent of the
population of the besieged colony, and if the effectiveness of the siege
is exactly 95 percent (i.e. the highest possible value). Also, only
population due to the installed mining and manufacturing bases will be
counted. (Population due to available population units, planetary
defense units and uninstalled colonist units will NOT be counted, since
they can be removed from the planet after assimilation takes place.)
Also, only the effective economic bases will be used; i.e., any base
over 200.0 will have only 5% of its actual value. (The purpose of this
rule is to prevent the unrealistic situation in which a besieged colony
artificially pumps up its economic base to prevent assimilation.)

When these conditions have been met, HALF of the mining and
manufacturing base of the besieged colony will simply be transferred to
the colony of the besieger, and the besieged colony will, in effect,
cease to exist. (The remaining half is considered lost due to conversion
inefficiency, low morale, guerrilla resistance, costs of dealing with a
hostile population, etc.)

For example, the Human colony on Vega III is besieged by the Klingons,
and the overall effectiveness of the siege is 95 percent. On Vega III,
the installed population is 1,180,000 (mining base is 61.8 and the
manufacturing base is 56.2). The Klingons also have a colony on the same
planet, named Kitomer, with a total installed population of 250,000.
Since the conditions for assimilation have been met, the computer will
increase the mining base of Kitomer by 30.9 and the manufacturing base
by 28.1. In addition, any inventory on Vega III will be transferred to
Kitomer. The Human colony Vega III will effectively disappear. From that
point on, the Klingon player has complete control of the Human
population on the planet. In effect, the Humans have become
‘assimilated’.

If the siege is being conducted by more than one species that have
colonies on the planet, then the mining and manufacturing base will be
allocated in proportion to the relative siege effectiveness of each
species.

Some players may object to the 20% population ratio, saying that 20% is
too large, and that a value such as 10% or even smaller would be more
realistic. Keep in mind, though, that here on Earth we are all humans on
our home planet. Assimilating an alien species on an alien planet should
be much more difficult.

.. _sec:surprise:

SURPRISE
--------

In some situations, it may be possible for one species to take another
completely by surprise. For example, an ally that has ships in your
system may attack unexpectedly. If surprise occurs, the attacker will be
given one free round of attacks. Also, the defender’s shields will be
down during the surprise round. (In Far Horizons, it is assumed that
shields are never in use unless absolutely necessary. Thus, when a ship
is taken by surprise, it will always be assumed that the shields are
down. Note that this is similar to the way shields are used in the Star
Trek stories.)

Surprise can only occur if you are attacked by a species that you have
declared to be an ``ALLY``.

If you suspect potential treachery, then give a ``BATTLE`` order for the
location, and also give any appropriate defensive ``ENGAGE`` orders.
When this is done, it will be assumed that you are on full alert, and
will not allow any allies to have a free round of surprise. Everyone at
the location, however, will definitely be aware of your heightened state
of alert.

.. _sec:betrayal:

BETRAYAL
--------

If you are attacked by a species that you have declared ``ALLY``, the
status of the attacker will automatically change to ``ENEMY`` after the
combat or strike phase in which the betrayal occurred. In effect, an
``ENEMY SP Attacker`` order will be issued for you.

If an ``ALLY`` is attacked by another ``ALLY``, the status of the
attacker will automatically change from ``ALLY`` to ``ENEMY``. In
effect, an ``ENEMY SP Attacker`` order will be issued for you.

[We’ll discuss how to declare enmity or alliance towards other species
later.]

.. _sec:combatlog:

COMBAT LOG
----------

A complete log of the the fighting that takes place during a battle will
be sent to the players of the species involved. The log describes who
fires on whom, and whether or not the shot was successful. Since a
battle contains many misses, these logs can become very long and very
boring. If you want to receive only a brief summary of the results, then
provide a ``SUMMARY`` command after the ``BATTLE`` command. The
``SUMMARY`` command has no arguments. Here is an example:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

           BATTLE  4 12 3
             SUMMARY               ;Log only the important stuff.
             ENGAGE        1       ;Try to keep fight, if any, away from
                                   ; colonies.
             ENGAGE        2 4     ;Protect planet \#4.
             etc.

   END

If a ``SUMMARY`` command is used, then only the important combat news
will be sent to the player. Various failures, misses, and hits that do
not completely destroy a ship or planetary defenses will not be
reported.

The gamemaster always has the option of turning on summary mode if he
feels that the logs are too long.

During a battle, it’s possible for cargo to be destroyed if damage
passes through the shields of a ship. Since this happens quite
frequently, it is NEVER reported in the combat log. You will only know
about it after the battle when you notice that some or all of the cargo
is missing.

.. _sec:damage:

DAMAGE
------

In FAR HORIZONS, damage done in combat is indicated by increasing a
ship’s age. Thus, when a ship’s age reaches 50, it is considered
destroyed, since this is the age at which a ship becomes 100%
disfunctional.

Ships which survive a battle, but which are badly damaged, can be
repaired by using the ``UPGRADE`` command, or can be “cashed in” by
using the ``RECYCLE`` command. Keep in mind, though, that these commands
can only be used on planets that have production capacity. If the ships
are badly damaged and are not in the same system as a producing planet
that you control, they may have to jump to such a planet, and may
self-destruct in the process.

.. _sec:withdrawingfromcombat:

WITHDRAWING FROM COMBAT
-----------------------

During the battle, your ships will have the option of withdrawing based
on conditions that you set using the ``WITHDRAW`` command. If ships do
withdraw, they will jump out of the sector to safety. You can also
specify a rendezvous point using the ``HAVEN`` command. The ``HAVEN``
command has the following format:

::

       Haven   x y z

where ``x``, ``y``, and ``z`` are coordinates where a ship should jump
to if it decides to withdraw from battle. If no ``HAVEN`` order is
given, then the ship will jump to a randomly selected location very
close to the battle sector. If a ship withdraws, then any explicit
``JUMP`` orders that appear in the jump section of your orders will be
ignored. (It is assumed that a ship that withdraws from combat is likely
to be damaged and that a normal, longer jump will be too dangerous.)

You may specify the conditions of withdrawal using the ``WITHDRAW``
command. Here is the format:

::

       Withdraw    n1 n2 n3

where:

   | n1 = maximum acceptable transport age
   | n2 = maximum acceptable warship age
   | n3 = maximum acceptable fleet loss percentage

The “fleet loss percentage” includes ships that have been destroyed or
that have already withdrawn.

Here’s an example:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

       ;The following combat orders will be for the attack on the Romulan home
       ; planet in their star system at 12 4 3...

           Battle          12 4 3
           Haven           10 3 3
           Withdraw        10 25 50

   END

In the above example, any ships that decide to withdraw will attempt to
jump to sector 10 3 3. An individual transport will withdraw if its age
is greater than 10. An individual warship will withdraw if its age is
greater than 25. The entire fleet will withdraw if at least 50% of the
ships in the fleet have either been destroyed or have already withdrawn.

For the special case where the transport value is EXACTLY zero,
transports will only withdraw if the entire fleet withdraws. For the
special case where the fleet value is EXACTLY zero, the fleet will
attempt to withdraw as soon as possible after ANY battle begins.

If no ``WITHDRAW`` order is given, the default will be:

::

       Withdraw    0 50 50

Thus, the default is to fight to the death.

If a ship withdraws during the strike phase, then the ship name will
contain the designation "WD" in the status report. These ships will jump
automatically in the jump phase of the next turn, and any explicit jump
orders will be ignored.

.. _sec:ambush:

AMBUSH
------

If you suspect that one or more other species may jump into your system
to do battle, you may make advance preparations to ‘ambush’ them. You
can do this by providing an ``AMBUSH`` order. However, unlike other
combat commands, the ``AMBUSH`` command is given in the ``PRODUCTION``
phase of your orders - NOT in the combat phase. The ``AMBUSH`` command
takes a single argument which indicates how much you will spend to
prepare for the ambush. For example, if you suspect that the Cardassians
and their allies will jump to your Vega IV colony system during the
current turn in order to attack you in either the strike phase of the
current turn or in the combat phase of the next turn, you can issue the
following order in the production section for PL Vega IV:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Vega IV
       ; Place production orders here for planet Vega IV.

           Ambush  250

   END

This indicates that you expect enemies to arrive in your sector before
the end of the turn.

To carry out the ambush, you should give appropriate combat orders in
the strike phase of the turn, as in the following example:

::

   START STRIKES
       ; Place strike orders here.

           Battle  12 9 23
           Attack  0       ; Attack any declared enemies that arrive.
   END

You may also give appropriate ``ENGAGE`` orders if you wish to continue
fighting after the initial ambush.

An ambush will provide your species with a number of ‘free’ attacks that
will damage and perhaps destroy enemy ships before any battle even
begins. These attacks will take place in deep space as the enemy ships
arrive in your system. The amount of damage done to the enemy will
depend on how much you spent for the ambush; that is, how well you
prepared.

Damage to the enemy will be measured in ‘Effective Aging’, which is
calculated as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Effective Aging}   =   \dfrac{10,000 \times \textrm{Amount Spent}}{\textrm{WT}  +  \textrm{TT}/10}

 where

   | ``WT`` = The total enemy warship tonnage in the star system
     immediately before combat begins.
   | ``TT`` = The total enemy transport tonnage in the star system
     immediately before combat begins.

The ‘Effective Aging’ value will be added to the actual age of each
enemy ship immediately before any battle begins. If the resulting age is
greater than 49, then the ship is destroyed.

   Example: You expect that the Klingons will jump to the Earth system
   during the current turn. In your production orders for PL Earth, you
   provide the order ``AMBUSH`` 710. The Klingons arrive with three
   warships: an ``FF`` (100,000 tons), a ``DD`` (150,000 tons), and a
   ``TR7`` (70,000 tons). Thus, the ‘Effective Aging’ value will be:

   .. math:: \dfrac{10,000  \times  710}{100,000  +  150,000  +  70,000/10} =  27.63  = 27

Note that fractions are dropped.

Thus, the age of each enemy ship will be increased by 27 turns
immediately before the battle, if any, begins. In a situation such as
the above, the ambush could be absolutely crippling.

In order for the ambush to take effect, you must issue an appropriate
``BATTLE`` order and one or more ``ATTACK`` orders during the strike
phase, so that the computer will know who you consider an enemy. You may
also provide any appropriate offensive and/or defensive ``ENGAGE``
options. Any normal combat will occur ``AFTER`` the ambush.

If the enemy does not arrive or if you do not issue any ``ATTACK``
orders, then the amount spent for the ambush will have been wasted.

A planet that is under siege may NOT issue an ``AMBUSH`` order.

Amounts spent on an ambush are cumulative. Thus, if two or more planets
in the same star system issue ``AMBUSH`` orders, the effectiveness will
be based on the total amount spent. Results are also cumulative if two
or more species collaborate in an ambush.

The actual details of the ambush are not important, since Far Horizons
is a strategic game - not a tactical one. However, an ambush could
involve ships waiting in hiding among asteroids, use of space mines,
subterfuge, and so on.

Since an ambush is essentially a way to ‘purchase victory’, there must
be a realistic limitation on how much can be achieved. It makes no
sense, for example, for a rich but poorly defended colony to be able to
wipe out a powerful invasion force. In Far Horizons, we will simulate
this reality as follows:

   The amount of effective aging that results from an ambush will be
   limited by the ratio of the warship tonnages present at the ambush.

For example, if the warship tonnage of the ambushing forces is on par
with the warship tonnage of the ambushed forces, then the full ambushing
effect described above will take place. If, however, the ambushing
forces are considerably weaker than the ambushed forces, then the net
effective aging will be reduced. And if the ambushing forces are
considerably stronger than the ambushed forces, then the effective aging
will be increased.

Finally, it is much easier to ambush enemy ships if they enter the
sector via a natural wormhole, since the ambushing species knows the
precise exit point and can concentrate more of its forces at that point.

To simulate this reality, a ship that is ambushed as it exits a natural
wormhole will experience DOUBLE the calculated age increase. Thus, if
any of the ships in the above example had arrived via a natural
wormhole, then their ages would have been increased by
:math:`2 \times 27 = 54`, which would have immediately destroyed them.

.. _sec:interception:

INTERCEPTION
------------

There may be times when you wish to intercept and destroy a ship that
jumps into one of your star systems before it can scan or learn anything
about your inhabited planets. For this purpose, use the ``INTERCEPT``
command.

The intercept command is like the ``AMBUSH`` command because it appears
in the production section of your orders and because you must specify
the amount you are willing to spend for the interception. However, it is
different because the results are applied immediately — you will attempt
to destroy any enemy ship that jumps into your system the moment it
arrives, rather than wait until the combat phase of the next turn.

It is also different because an ambush implies advance knowledge of who
is coming and when they are coming. Interception implies a general state
of alert without any advance knowledge. Thus, interception is inherently
more difficult than ambushing, and has a higher cost for the same
results.

When an ``INTERCEPT`` order is given in the production phase of your
orders, it will apply immediately to any enemy ships that enter the
system during the current turn. You can specify which species are
enemies using the ``ENEMY`` command. The ``ENEMY`` command can appear in
either the pre-departure, production, or post-arrival section of your
orders. Here are some examples:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Enemy   SP Klingon
           ENEMY   SP Romulan
           enem    999             ; ALL species are my enemies.

   END

The ``ENEMY`` command takes a single argument, either a name of a
species or a number. If it is a number, it states that all species in
the game (even those you have not yet met) are your enemies. Otherwise
it states that the indicated species is your enemy. You may specify an
enemy command for as many species as you want. When the argument is a
number, any number may be used — the actual value is not important.

An ``ENEMY`` command remains in effect until cancelled. You can cancel
an ``ENEMY`` command with either the ``NEUTRAL`` or ``ALLY`` commands.
These also can appear in either the pre-departure, production, or
post-arrival phase of the turn:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Neutral SP Klingon
           Neutral 7               ; I am neutral towards everyone.
           Ally    sp klingon      ; The Klingons are now my allies.

   END

Again, a numeric argument (regardless of value) may be used to indicate
neutrality towards ALL species in the game, even those you have not yet
met. However, a numeric argument may NOT be used with the ``ALLY``
command. You can name one and only one species in an ``ALLY`` command,
and you must have already met the species before you may declare
alliance.

If you wish to declare that everyone in the game is an enemy EXCEPT one
or more other species, declare everyone an enemy and then use the
``NEUTRAL`` or ``ALLY`` commands for the non-enemies. For example:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Enem    111          ; Everyone is my enemy...
           Ally    SP Vulcan    ;  ...except the Vulcans (our allies)
           NEUTRAL SP Bajoran   ;  ...and the Bajorans (who I'm not sure of yet)

   END

``ENEMY``, ``ALLY``, and ``NEUTRAL`` orders will remain in effect until
cancelled.

Unless you specify otherwise, the computer will assume that you are
neutral towards all species in the game. When you meet a species for the
first time, the computer will assume that you are neutral towards it,
unless you have previously issued an ENEMY order with a numeric
argument.

When an ``INTERCEPT`` order is executed, the computer will check if any
enemy ships have successfully jumped into the star system of the
producing planet during the current turn. If so, the total amount spent
for interception on all planets in the star system will be applied to
the enemy ships that just arrived, one at a time, until all ships are
destroyed or until funds run out, whichever comes first. Ships will be
chosen in random order, so as not to bias the results against any one
enemy species.

The amount needed to destroy an enemy ship can be calculated as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Cost} =  \dfrac{100  \times  \textrm{warship tonnage}}{10,000}

The cost needed to intercept and destroy a transport will be one-tenth
of the cost for a warship of the same tonnage.

Note that, unlike an ambush, the ships are not aged - they are either
completely destroyed or completely unharmed. If there are not enough
funds to destroy the current randomly selected ship, then the
interception process ends, and all remaining funds, if any, are wasted.

For example, let’s say that three enemy ships successfully jump into the
Earth solar system. The first is a 150,000 ton Klingon destroyer, the
second is a 50,000 ton Romulan escort, and the third is a 50,000 ton
Romulan transport. In the same turn, the production orders for Earth and
Mars (in the same star system) contain the orders:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Place production orders here for planet Earth.

           Intercept       450

       PRODUCTION PL Mars
       ; Place production orders here for planet Mars.

           Int             100

   END

Thus, the total amount spent on interception is 550.

At the end of production for your species, the computer randomly selects
the 50,000 ton Romulan escort as the first ship for interception. The
cost is:

.. math:: \dfrac{100  \times  50,000}{10,000}  =  500

Since the current balance is 550, the escort is destroyed and the new
balance is :math:`550 - 500 = 50`. If the computer then randomly selects
the destroyer for destruction, the interception process immediately ends
because the balance of 50 is not enough to destroy the destroyer (1500
needed), EVEN THOUGH IT IS ENOUGH TO DESTROY THE TRANSPORT! Thus, both
the destroyer and the transport will be unharmed. If the computer had
randomly selected the transport before the destroyer, then the transport
would have been destroyed.

This element of chance is intentional, since an interception is
inherently less reliable and more ‘chancy’ than an ambush.

Note that the three enemy ships do not have to be owned by the same
species.

All species involved in an intercept will be notified of the results in
their status reports. The species that owns the ships that were
destroyed will only be informed that the ships disappeared without a
trace, cause unknown. Thus, the intercepted species will not know if the
ship was destroyed by an enemy, or if it self-destructed on its own.

You may give both ``INTERCEPT`` and ``AMBUSH`` orders in your production
orders. Obviously, ``INTERCEPT`` orders will apply immediately, while
``AMBUSH`` orders will take effect at the very beginning of the combat
phase of the next turn.

Anything spent on interception is wasted if no enemy ships jump into the
system; i.e., the amount spent does NOT carry over into the next turn. A
planet that is under siege cannot issue ``INTERCEPT`` orders.
Interceptions by more than one species in the same star system are NOT
combined — they are each handled separately.

If an interception fails completely, the intended victim will not be
told that an interception had been planned, and will remain completely
in the dark.

Interception will only be used against ships that enter the sector via a
JUMP, ``PJUMP``, or ``WORMHOLE`` command. Interception cannot be used
against ships that ``MOVE`` into a sector.

A ship that ``MOVE``\ s into a system is moving at sub-light speeds and
will have telemetry of the space ahead, as well as the time to analyze
the telemetry. An ``INTERCEPT`` takes advantage of the “timelessness” of
the jump and the complete lack of data about the destination until the
moment of emergence from the wormhole.

The main purpose of an interception is to prevent exploratory vessels
from learning about the inhabitants of a star system. It is NOT intended
as a replacement for normal combat. To reflect this reality, the
``INTERCEPT`` command will be limited as follows:

   The maximum size of a ship that may be successfully intercepted is
   50,000 tons for warships and 200,000 tons for transports. If the
   random selection process described above selects a larger ship, then
   the selection process will abruptly end.

For example, if three ships are randomly selected in the order
<picketboat, battlecruiser, picketboat>, then only the first picketboat
will be destroyed, even if there were sufficient funds allocated to
destroy all three ships.

There is one major exception to the above rules regarding interception.
Interception of a ship is much easier when the ship is exiting a natural
wormhole, since the intercepting species knows the precise exit point
and can concentrate more of its forces at that point.

To simulate this reality, the above tonnage limitations will NOT apply
if the intercepted ship entered the sector via a natural wormhole. In
other words, any ship can be intercepted and destroyed, REGARDLESS OF
SIZE, if it enters the sector via a natural wormhole and if sufficient
funds have been allocated for the interception.

.. _sec:strategictargets:

STRATEGIC TARGETS
-----------------

In general, an attacker will try to concentrate fire on the most
powerful targets in order to eliminate them as quickly as possible.
Smaller targets will generally be ignored until all of the more
dangerous opponents are eliminated. Thus, if you have a large number of
small ships (i.e. ‘cannon fodder’) and hope that they’ll draw the fire
of more powerful opponents, you’ll be disappointed. Attackers will
rarely waste shots on puny targets as long as larger prey are available.

In some battles, however, you may want to concentrate your fire on
targets of a specific type. For example, if you suspect that enemy
transports are carrying germ warfare bombs, you may want to concentrate
your fire on transports as long as they are within range. To specify a
favorite target for a battle, use the ``TARGET`` command, as follows:

::

       Target  1   ; Concentrate fire on warships.
       Target  2   ; Concentrate fire on transports.
       Target  3   ; Concentrate fire on starbases.
       Target  4   ; Concentrate fire on planetary defense units.

Only one ``TARGET`` order may be given per battle. If more than one is
given then only the last one will be effective.

The ``TARGET`` command simply indicates that you want to concentrate
fire on units of the selected type. However, it does not guarantee that
you will ONLY fire on the selected targets. The tactical situation may
either prevent you from firing on a selected target or may force you to
attack a different target. For example, if there are no more enemy units
of the selected type, then your units will fire on any available enemy
units.

.. _sec:strikephase:

THE STRIKE PHASE
----------------

Combat can take place either in the combat phase or in the strike phase.

All combat orders and engagement options are allowed in the combat
phase.

All combat orders are allowed in the strike phase. However, engagement
options for planet bombardment, germ warfare, and sieges are not allowed
in the strike phase.

In effect, the strike phase is a limited-combat phase, And any combat
that does take place in the strike phase generally takes the form of an
initial surprise attack. Combat that requires more time, such as
bombardment and siege, will take place in the combat phase of the
following turn, and is thus a continuation of the combat that began in
the strike phase.

Note that, even though a turn break occurs between the strike phase of
one turn and the combat phase of the following turn, no actual game time
passes.

.. _sec:picketduty:

PICKET DUTY
-----------

There may be times when you need to intercept enemy ships, but the
INTERCEPT command will not work. For example, the ships may be too
large, or they may be entering the sector via the ``MOVE`` command. In
situations like these, you can effectively intercept enemy ships in the
strike phase - IF you have the firepower. Here’s how to do it:

::

   START STRIKES
   ; Place strike orders here.

           Battle  x y z
           Attack  SP name
           Engage  3               ; Deep space attack.
   END

If you win the battle, the intruding ships will be destroyed before they
can learn much about the sector.

Note that the above battle will not prevent the intruder from doing a
scan during the post-arrival phase, but it WILL keep it from learning
about who has colonies in the sector, what their economic bases are, and
which non-attacking species, ships, and starbases are also in the
sector. The intruder will only know that the attacker probably (but not
necessarily!) inhabits the sector.

However, there is still one potential problem. If the intruder
``MOVE``\ s to your sector and then ``ORBIT``\ s a planet, the above
orders would not have the desired effect. This is because an
``ENGAGE 3`` order only tells your ships to attack enemy ships that are
in deep space. You can, of course, give ``ENGAGE 4 n`` orders for all of
the planets in the system, but this is a nuisance.

Instead, a special rule will apply in this kind of situation: the
computer will reject a post-arrival ``ORBIT`` order for a ship that has
just ``MOVE``\ d into a sector. If necessary, the ``ORBIT`` order can be
given in the pre-departure phase of the next turn.

.. _sec:hidingstrength:

HIDING YOUR STRENGTH
--------------------

There may be times when you wish to engage in combat with an enemy, but
you do not want to show your full strength. For example, let’s say that
you have a large fleet landed on a planet where the enemy cannot detect
it. If you want to attack a single, small, enemy ship, you can do so
using the commands described earlier. However, ALL of your ships will
take part in the battle, and the enemy will learn your total strength in
that sector.

To deal with this problem, you can use the ``HIDE`` command to tell the
computer that specific ships are NOT to take part in combat unless
absolutely necessary. Here’s an example:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

           Battle  23 17 3
           Attack  SP Klingon
           Attack  SP Romulan
           Engage  3               ; Deep space attack.
           Hide    DN Omigosh      ; These ships should not fight unless we're
           Hide    BS Thunderclap  ;  losing the battle.
           Hide    BCS Whopper

   END

In the above example, all of your warships in the sector will take part
in the deep space attack except DN Omigosh, BS Thunderclap, and BCS
Whopper. They will only join the battle if you are losing.

You may only give a ``HIDE`` order to ships that are landed on the
surface of a planet. ``HIDE`` orders given to ships in orbit or in deep
space will be ignored.

If you give a ``HIDE`` order to a transport, the enemy will only be
allowed to attack it if you start losing the battle.

A ship that is given a ``HIDE`` order will not take part in any
subsequent bombardment or siege, unless it also took part in the battle.

Keep in mind that there may be a risk in using the ``HIDE`` command. If
you misjudge the enemy’s strength, they may be able to destroy your
front guard before the reserves join the fight. On the other hand, if
all ships had been in the battle from the beginning, enemy fire could
have been spread so thin that none of them would have been damaged.

.. _sec:hijacking:

HIJACKING
---------

The ``HIJACK`` command should be used if you do NOT want to destroy
enemy ships, but instead want to capture them. The captured ships and
cargo can then be sold for profit, and the crew and passengers can then
be ransomed or sold into slavery. The ``HIJACK`` command should be used
instead of the ``ATTACK`` command, as in the following example:

::

   START COMBAT
   ; Place combat orders here.

           Battle  10 25 12
           Attack  SP Klingon      ; Attack the Klingons and attempt to destroy
                                   ;  their ships.
           Hijack  SP Romulan      ; Attack the Romulans and attempt to capture
                                   ;  their ships.
           Engage  3               ; Attack them in deep space...
           Engage  5 2             ;  and at planet 2, and bombard the planet if
                                   ;    possible afterwards, ...
           Engage  7 3             ;  and at planet 3, and besiege the planet if
                                   ;    possible afterwards.
   END

Hijacking may also be attempted in the strike phase.

When attempting to ``HIJACK`` the ships of another species, combat will
occur in the usual way, but the hijacking ships will have only 25% of
their normal offensive and defensive combat capabilities. If an enemy
ship is then "destroyed", it will be considered effectively “hijacked”.
If you ``ATTACK`` one or more species while ``HIJACK``\ ing one or more
other species in the same battle, then your ships will have the reduced
combat capabilities whether they are ``ATTACK``\ ing or ``HIJACK``\ ing.
Because of this, it may not be a good idea to do both unless you have
vastly superior forces.

Hijacked ships and cargo will be automatically sold, and economic units
will be added to the treasury of the hijacking species. The number of
economic units received will be equal to the normal recycle value of the
hijacked ships and their cargo.

You may NOT hijack planetary defense units. If successfully attacked,
they will be destroyed.

If additional combat operations take place after the hijacking (such as
bombardment or siege), the attacking ships will have their full, normal
combat capability.

.. _sec:miscoperations:

MISCELLANEOUS OPERATIONS
========================

Commands and other operations that do not belong in any of the previous
chapters will be discussed here.

.. _sec:scanorders:

SCAN ORDERS
-----------

If you wish to receive information about a star system, you must order a
ship to do a sensor scan. Use the ``SCAN`` command to do this. For
example:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

        SCAN TR1 Intrepid

   END

The ``SCAN`` command may only be issued in the pre-departure or
post-arrival sections of your orders.

If the ship mis-jumped to the scan location during the jump phase, then
a scan order issued in the post-arrival phase will still be executed,
but it won’t detect anything unless it mis-jumped to coordinates that
contain a star system, which is highly unlikely.

A scan only tells you about the physical characteristics of the planets
in the sector. It does NOT tell you which planets are populated, or if
there are other ships in the sector. This additional information is
always automatically provided on your status report, whether or not you
give a ``SCAN`` order. Remember, though, that you will never be able to
detect ships that have landed on a populated planet unless you also have
population on the same planet.

If you have a ship or a populated planet in a star system that has one
or more alien inhabited planets, your status report will also provide an
approximate indication of the amount of commercial and industrial
activity on those planets. The activity will be indicated as in the
following example:

::

     Colony planet PL Dizzy (planet #2)                 SP Goofballs
         (Economic base is approximately 210.)

This simply indicates that a planet named ``Dizzy`` is colonized by a
species named ``Goofballs``, and that the sum of mining base plus
manufacturing base on the planet is approximately 210. Again, this
information is provided automatically on your status report — there is
no need to provide a ``SCAN`` order.

.. _sec:messages:

MESSAGES
--------

You can send a message to any species you know of with the ``MESSAGE``
command. Messages may be sent in either the pre-departure or
post-arrival phase of the turn. Here are some examples:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

     MESSAGE   SP Klingons

       My email address is goofy@bubblegum.gov. Please contact me ASAP!

     ZZZ

   END

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

   Mes SP Romulans
   Please do not be alarmed at the size of the fleet in your home system. We're
   simply using your home system as a rest stop on our way to another location.
   Rest assured that we have no ill intentions towards you.
   zzz

   END

Messages can be as long as you wish. Make sure to end the message with a
line containing the command ``ZZZ``. Also make sure that none of the
lines in the message itself start with the letters ‘zzz’.

.. _sec:transferringeconomicunits:

TRANSFERRING ECONOMIC UNITS
---------------------------

To transfer economic units to another species, use the ``SEND`` command.
For example, if you wish to transfer 250 economic units to the Klingons,
you should give the following order:

::

       Send 250 SP Klingon

You may not ``SEND`` economic units to a species that you have declared
to be an ``ENEMY``. If you wish to ``SEND`` economic units to an
``ENEMY``, make a temporary declaration of neutrality, as in the
following example:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

       Neutral     SP Tholian
       Send    500 SP Tholian
       Enemy       SP Tholian
   END

A ``SEND`` order must appear in the pre-departure or post-arrival
section of your orders — NOT during production!

.. _sec:knowledgetransfers:

KNOWLEDGE TRANSFERS
-------------------

In Far Horizons, a donor species may transfer knowledge to a recipient
species using the ``TEACH`` command, as in the following examples:

::

            Teach  GV  SP Klingon
            Teach  BI 17   SP Klingon

where the maximum tech level to be taught is optional. If not specified,
then the actual tech level of the teacher will be used.

``TEACH`` orders may only appear in the post-arrival section of your
orders.

You may not ``TEACH`` a species you haven’t yet met.

When a ``TEACH`` order is executed, the computer simply notes that you
have obtained knowledge associated with a tech level. If you then
``RESEARCH`` the technology in a later turn, there will be no randomness
in achieving the new tech level, since you already have the needed
knowledge. Instead, the funds will be used to perform the necessary
engineering and to spread the new technology throughout the species. In
effect, the research funds will be used directly to ‘purchase’ the new
tech level.

Since the basic research is eliminated, the randomness is also
eliminated and the cost is reduced. However, the recipient must still do
the initial engineering and development work. Thus, the cost of a tech
increase will be less than the cost of solitary research.

On average, if you wish to increase a tech level by one point using
normal, unaided research, then the average cost will be the current tech
level times itself. For example, if the current Biology tech level is 9,
then the basic cost to increase the tech level from 9 to 10 is
:math:`9 \times 9 = 81`. Keep in mind, though, that this is an AVERAGE
value. Basic research is highly random.

Now, if another species first transfers the knowledge to you via the
``TEACH`` command, then there will be a 25% discount on the basic cost
of research, and there will be no randomness at all.

For example, SP Human gives the following post-arrival order:

::

        Teach  GV 20  SP Klingon

In the next turn, the Klingons have a gravitics tech level of 18 and
give the following production order:

::

       Research 750 GV

When this order is processed, the Klingon gravitics tech level will
immediately rise as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{cost for } 18 \textrm{ to } 19 = 18 \times 18 - 25\% \textrm{ discount } = 324 - 81 = 243

.. math:: \textrm{cost for } 19 \textrm{ to } 20 = 19 \times 19 - 25\% \textrm{ discount } = 361 - 90 = 271

.. math:: \textrm{total cost using transferred knowledge} = 243 + 271 = 514

 The remaining funds :math:`(750 - 514 = 236)` will be allocated to
additional, normal research in gravitics.

| If knowledge has been transferred to you but has not yet been applied,
  the usable knowledge level will appear in your status report as in the
  following example:
| Tech Levels:

| &= 17/21 &
| &= 17 &
| &= 9 &
| &= 8 &
| &= 13/14 &
| &= 4 &

The above indicates that your mining tech level is 17, but that you have
knowledge up to 21. Similarly for life support.

There is no limit to how much technical knowledge may be transferred in
a single turn. As long as the donor’s tech level is high enough, the
transfer will take place.

You may NOT transfer knowledge to a species that you have declared to be
an ``ENEMY``. If you wish to transfer knowledge to an ``ENEMY``, make a
temporary declaration of neutrality, as in the following example:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           Neutral         SP Klingon
           Teach   GV 20   SP Klingon
           Enemy           SP Klingon
   END

TEACH orders will not be logged in the donor’s status report. They will
be logged in the recipient’s report ONLY if they succeed in raising the
knowledge level of the recipient.

It is strictly forbidden to attempt to transfer knowledge to a species
that does not want it or which is not expecting it. This is necessary
because some species may not want certain types of knowledge for
role-playing reasons. Any player that intentionally breaks this rule
will be evicted from the game.

.. _sec:estimatetechlevels:

ESTIMATING THE TECH LEVELS OF OTHER SPECIES
-------------------------------------------

At any time after meeting another species, you many analyze all of the
information you have about the species and estimate their tech levels.
To do this, issue the ``ESTIMATE`` command in the production section of
your orders for a planet. Here is an example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Dagwood
       ; Place production orders here for planet Dagwood.

        Estimate SP Klingon

   END

Each estimate has a cost of 25. You will receive an estimate of all six
tech levels for the species.

The accuracy of your estimate will depend on how high your tech level is
compared to the same technology for the other species. If your tech
level is significantly higher than the level for the other species, then
the estimate will be very accurate. At the opposite extreme, if your
tech level is much lower than the level of the other species, then the
estimate may not be very accurate.

.. _sec:disbandcolony:

DISBANDING A COLONY
-------------------

There may be situations when it is desirable to disband a colony. For
example, you may be ordered to leave by a more powerful enemy who will
destroy the colony if you don’t obey. In this case, it would be better
to remove the colony peacefully, and perhaps salvage some of your
investment, than to fight a battle that you know you cannot win.

If you decide to disband a colony, for whatever reason, you should use
the ``DISBAND`` command in the pre-departure section of your orders. For
example,

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Disband         PL Vega III

   END

You may NOT disband your home planet.

You may NOT disband a colony that is under siege.

When processing a ``DISBAND`` order, the computer will do the following:

#. Any mining base and manufacturing base will be converted to Colonist
   Units, Colonial Mining Units, and Colonial Manufacturing Units; i.e.
   exactly the reverse of the ``INSTALL`` command. However, ``IU``\ s
   and ``AU``\ s will only be converted at 50% efficiency. For example,
   a mining base of 21.3 will produce 213 ``CU``\ s, but only 106
   ``IU``\ s.

#. The computer will mark the colony as “disbanded”.

#. At the end of the turn (after the post-arrival phase) the computer
   will convert anything of value that is left on the "disbanded" planet
   to economic units, and will automatically transfer the economic units
   to the balance for the species. Any ships that are landed on the
   planet and any starbases orbiting the planet plus any cargo that they
   carry will be salvaged, even ships that were under construction. The
   amount of economic units obtained by salvaging will be ONE-HALF of
   their total ``RECYCLE`` value (see section 5.10 for information about
   recycling).

When a colony is marked as “disbanded”, any ships on the surface,
including ships that are still under construction, and any starbases in
orbit are marked as “salvage”. If you ``LAND`` a ship on the planet
after the DISBAND order, it will also be marked as “salvage”. If you
``ORBIT`` a starbase around the colony after the ``DISBAND`` order, it
will also be marked as “salvage”. You may not give any ``MOVE``,
``ORBIT``, ``JUMP``, ``PJUMP``, or ``WORMHOLE`` orders to a ship or
starbase that has been marked as "salvage". Thus, it is important to
issue any ``LAND`` or ``ORBIT`` orders ``BEFORE`` giving the ``DISBAND``
order.

In the pre-departure section of your orders, immediately after the
``DISBAND`` order, you can fill up any other ships and transports with
the ``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, ``AU``\ s, and anything else that is on the
planet, and give these ships orders to leave in the jump section of your
orders. In other words, the “disbanded” colony and “salvage” ships and
starbases may still take part in ``TRANSFER`` commands after the
``DISBAND`` order has been given. In this way, you can ``TRANSFER`` any
items of value that are on the planet or on the “salvage” ships to other
ships or even to other planets in the star system. If you have any jump
portals in the star system, you may use them as well, including any jump
portal starbases that have been marked as “salvage” (see section on high
tech items for more information about jump portals).

After the post-arrival phase, any items and ships that are on a
“disbanded” planet and starbases that are in orbit around the planet
will be salvaged, even if they were not there when the ``DISBAND`` order
was executed. If these ships or starbases have cargo, then the cargo
will also be salvaged. The actual details of the salvaging operation are
not important. (Possible scenarios: 1. The people on the planet
commandeer all commercial vessals in the system, load them up, and
escape. 2. The people on the planet negotiate with the enemy for a
little more time to disband. 3. If there is time, the people and the
government can hire commercial spacelines, or even professional
salvaging companies to disband the colony. And so on.)

The DISBAND command will completely delete all information about the
planet, even its name. Thus, you may also use this command to delete a
planet that you have named but have not yet colonized.

.. _sec:destroyingships:

DESTROYING SHIPS AND STARBASES
------------------------------

If you want to destroy a ship or starbase (for whatever reason), use the
``DESTROY`` command, as in the following examples:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Destroy         BAS One Shot
           DES             CTS Billy Joe Bob
           dest            TR4 Lollipop
   END

When the ``DESTROY`` order is executed, the ship or starbase and all of
its contents are blown to smithereens. Nothing is salvaged.

The ``DESTROY`` command may be used in either the pre-departure or the
post-arrival phase of the turn.

Unlike the ``RECYCLE`` command, the ``DESTROY`` command may be used
anywhere - the ship or starbase does not have to be at a planet or in a
star system.

The fate of the crew of the destroyed ship or starbase depends on the
species. Some will commit suicide, some will choose to die with the
ship, others may escape in lifeboats, and so on. It’s entirely up to the
player.

.. _sec:developcommand:

THE “DEVELOP” COMMAND
---------------------

It’s easy to make mistakes when calculating the number of ``IU``\ s and
``AU``\ s needed for a colony. If the number of units is not properly
balanced (based on the mining difficulty), then you’ll either have
excessive production capacity or excessive raw material units.

The ``DEVELOP`` command was implemented to do these calculations for
you, and to save you some time in other ways as well.

The ``DEVELOP`` command has three modes of operation. In the first mode,
the command has two arguments: the name of the colony and the name of
the transport that will carry the ``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, and ``AU``\ s.
Here is an example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Place production orders here for planet Earth.

           Develop PL Orion 7, TR20 Tubby

   END

For the above order, the computer will first determine the current cargo
capacity of the transport. If the colony is a normal colony (as opposed
to a resort or mining colony) and has the resources to build its own
``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s, then the computer will build only ``CU``\ s to
fill the transport; otherwise it will build the correct balance of
``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, and ``AU``\ s based on the mining difficulty of
the planet. If the colony is a resort colony, then only ``CU``\ s and
``AU``\ s will be built. If the colony is a mining colony, then only
``CU``\ s and ``IU``\ s will be built. If only ``CU``\ s are being sent
to the colony, then the computer will also generate orders for the
colony to build the correct amount of ``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s based on
the mining difficulty. (Why waste cargo space for ``IU``\ s and
``AU``\ s? Let the colony build them!) These orders will be placed in
the orders section at the end of the status report.

Incidentally, when the ``DEVELOP`` command is processed, the computer
can not predict exactly what the production will be on the colony during
the next turn. For example, the computer does not know what the fleet
maintenance cost will be, and cannot predict if the player will be doing
other production on the colony. Because of this, it makes a very
conservative estimate of the next turn’s production. The result may be
that the transport carries ``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s that the colony is
capable of building itself. However, this will not be a serious problem
because it will only occur once or twice, when the colony is still
relatively small.

If the colony is not yet colonized, or if it does not have sufficient
production capacity to build its own ``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s, then the
computer will fill the remaining cargo space of the transport with a
correct balance of ``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, and ``AU``\ s based on the
planet’s mining difficulty. Note that this will only work for normal
colonies. If you want to start a mining or resort colony, do not use the
``DEVELOP`` command. However, the ``DEVELOP`` command may be used AFTER
the mining or resort colony has been started.

At the end of production, any ``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, and ``AU``\ s will
be loaded onto the transport. Also, an order will be automatically
generated for the transport to jump to the colony. This order will be
placed in the order section at the end of your status report. This
assumes, of course, that the ship is in the same sector as the producing
planet. If not, the items will remain on the surface of the planet and
no ``JUMP`` order will be given for the ship.

If you want to load other cargo onto the transport, make sure to do so
BEFORE issuing a ``DEVELOP`` order. A ``DEVELOP`` order will use all
remaining unused cargo space.

Note that the ``DEVELOP`` order must be given in the production phase of
your orders.

In the second mode of operation, no transport is mentioned. Instead, it
is assumed that the colony is in the same sector as the producing
planet. Here is an example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Place production orders here for planet Earth.

           Dev     PL Venus

   END

The above order is similar to the previous one, except that the
remaining available population of the PRODUCING planet will be used, and
the items will be automatically transferred to the colony instead of to
a transport. In addition, an order will be automatically generated for
the next turn to install the units on the colony.

Since this mode uses the available population of the PRODUCING planet,
this order should be placed after any other orders are given to build
``CU``\ s or ``PD``\ s.

In the third mode of operation, the command should be given on the
colony itself and has no arguments. Here is an example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Venus
       ; Place production orders here for planet Venus.

           DEV

   END

For the above order, the computer will build :math:`X` ``CU``\ s, where
:math:`X` is equal to the remaining available population, and a correct
balance of ``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s based on the mining difficulty of the
planet. It will also automatically generate ``INSTALL`` orders for the
next turn to install the units. Note that this command cannot be given
on a mining or resort colony, since it has no production capability.

If you do not have sufficient funds to utilize all of the available
population or transport cargo capacity, then the computer will use the
available funds as the limiting factor. Note that the computer WILL
spend economic units from the treasury, if needed.

In all of the above modes, you may optionally specify a spending limit.
Here’s an example:

::

   START PRODUCTION
       PRODUCTION PL Earth
       ; Place production orders here for planet Earth.

           Dev     450     PL Venus

   END

In the above example, no more than 450 will be spent to develop the
planet Venus even if you have more available funds or available
population.

Normally, you may not ``DEVELOP`` a home planet. However, if the home
planet has been bombed, then you may use the ``DEVELOP`` command to
bring it back to its original value.

.. _sec:autocommand:

THE “AUTO” COMMAND
------------------

Far Horizons is a complicated simulation, and providing orders for all
of your ships and planets can be both tedious and time-consuming,
especially in later stages of the game when empires become very large.
The ``AUTO`` command is intended to reduce the tedium and make it less
likely that mistakes or omissions will occur.

The ``AUTO`` command should be given in the post-arrival phase of your
orders. It has no arguments:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           Auto

   END

The AUTO command instructs the computer to automatically generate
reasonable orders for your ships and planets FOR THE NEXT TURN and to
place these orders in the appropriate places in the orders section of
the status report. The AUTO command will generate orders to accomplish
the following:

#. If a transport has colonist units in it, is not in the home sector,
   and is orbiting or landed on a planet whose economic base is less
   than 200, then an ``UNLOAD`` order will be generated for the
   transport, and it will be given an order to ``JUMP`` to the planet
   where it was most recently loaded with ``CU``\ s (typically the
   homeworld). Also, a ``DEVELOP`` command will be generated for the
   destination planet to prepare colonists for the same colony using the
   same transport.

#. Since ``TR1``\ s are normally used for scouting, ``JUMP`` orders will
   be started for all ``TR1``\ s. The destination will be the closest
   star that has not yet been visited by your species. If you’ve already
   visited all stars in the galaxy, then the destination will be “???”.
   The order will be commented with the age and current location of the
   ship, plus the mishap chance for the jump.

#. All other ships will be issued ``JUMP`` orders with the destination
   “???”. The order will be commented with the age and current location
   of the ship.

#. If a planet will have excess raw material units in the next turn, an
   order will be generated to recycle them.

#. If a colony has an economic base less than 200 and if it has an
   available population greater than zero, then a ``DEVELOP`` order will
   be generated for it.

#. For the home planet and any colonies that have an economic base of
   200 or more, a check will be made to see if any other colonies in the
   same sector have an economic base less than 200. If so, then orders
   will be generated to ``DEVELOP`` those colonies.

#. Starbases will be given orders to increase their sizes up to the MA
   tech limit. A comment will indicate the current size.

#. Ships that are still under construction will be given orders to
   complete their construction. A comment will indicate the amount left
   to pay.

#. If a ``TR1`` is in a sector that you do not inhabit, the computer
   will assume that it is a scouting vessel and will generate a ``SCAN``
   order for it in the post-arrival phase.

#. An ``AUTO`` command will be generated for the next turn.

Obviously, if you do not agree with a particular order, you can simply
delete it or change it to something more desirable. For example, if an
order is automatically generated to develop your Rigel colony, you can
manually change it to develop your Arcturus colony instead.

.. _sec:visitedcommand:

THE “VISITED” COMMAND
---------------------

The ``AUTO`` command generates orders for ``TR1``\ s to ``JUMP`` to the
nearest sector that your species has not yet visited. However, the
computer has no way of knowing if another player gives you a scan of an
unvisited sector. The VISITED command tells the computer that you
already have a scan of a sector and that you do not want it to generate
``JUMP`` orders to go there for your TR1s. Here are some examples:

::

   START JUMPS
   ; Place jump orders here.

           Vis     31 12 18        ; We just received scans of these sectors
           VISIT   33 9 10         ;  from our allies.

   END

A ``VISITED`` order must appear in the ``JUMP`` section of your orders,
and the x, y, and z coordinates must apply to a sector that has a star.
If the sector does not have a star, then the order will be ignored.

Also, whenever you ``NAME`` a planet, the sector will me marked as
visited by your species even if you have not actually been there.

.. _sec:miscellany:

MISCELLANY
==========

This chapter will cover those aspects of the game that do not quite
belong in any of the other chapters. Since it is also the last chapter,
it is an ideal place to make additions, corrections, threats, etc.
without throwing everything else out of kilter. Thus, this chapter is
probably the most important one in the rules.

.. _sec:hightechitems:

HIGH-TECH ITEMS
---------------

Appendix A of this manual contains a list of high-tech items that your
species will be able to build when it achieves certain minimum tech
levels. You will be notified on your status report whenever this occurs.
The descriptions of the high-tech items are self-explanatory.

All high-tech items must be built in a single turn, unless specified
otherwise.

.. _sec:communicationbetweenplayers:

COMMUNICATION BETWEEN PLAYERS
-----------------------------

Players who wish to keep their real identities anonymous may do so. You
may send a message to another species via the ``MESSAGE`` command. The
recipient will only know the name of the species who sent the message.
If you wish to communicate directly with other players, you can send
them your email address with the ``MESSAGE`` command.

In addition, some gamemasters may provide a list server at their email
site that will allow players to send messages to other players using
species names rather than player addresses. It will also allow you to
broadcast messages to all other players, anonymously or non-anonymously.

.. _sec:interspeciestransfers:

INTERSPECIES TRANSFERS
----------------------

It is not practical or realistic to allow items or ships to be
transferred from one species to another. Items built for one species are
not likely to be suitable for use by a different species. The easiest
and least expensive way to give something to another species is to give
them economic units, discussed earlier. You may also build items and
ships SPECIFICALLY for another species. This will be discussed later in
the section on ‘interspecies construction’.

.. _sec:questions:

QUESTIONS
---------

Questions for the gamemaster should NOT be sent with your orders for the
turn. You should send any questions to the gamemaster in a separate
email message. It is quite possible that the gamemaster will never even
see your orders, but will simply feed them to the computer.

.. _sec:planetnamesnotnumbers:

USE PLANET NAMES, NOT NUMBERS!
------------------------------

The precise designation for a planet is ``X Y Z N``, where ``N`` is the
number of the planet in the star system. This complete designation is
only allowed in the ``NAME`` command, discussed earlier. Planet numbers
are also needed in some combat commands, and may be used in the ``LAND``
and ``ORBIT`` commands. In all other commands, planet names MUST be used
if you need to refer to a specific planet, such as ``PL Earth``. You may
NEVER use planet names assigned by other species. When processing YOUR
orders, the computer is only aware of names that YOU have assigned.
(There is one exception to this - the ``PJUMP`` command - which will be
discussed later in the section on Jump Portals.)

If a star system has one or more planets with names, you may still refer
to the star system by using the X, Y, and Z coordinates, but this is not
recommended. If you mis-type a planet name, the gamemaster will be
notified by the computer and can correct the mis-spelling. If you
mis-type a coordinate, however, the gamemaster is not likely to know
your intentions, even if an error is reported by the computer.
Furthermore, if it is a ``JUMP`` order, your ship may mis-jump or even
self-destruct. However, you should avoid giving names to planets that
you have not colonized, unless you travel there frequently.

When jumping to meet another species, there is never any need to specify
a particular planet. As long as members of two species are in the same
sector, they may interact. There are no combat advantages or
disadvantages to being on or near a particular planet in an encounter.

Finally, it is possible to ``NAME`` planets in a sector that you have
not yet visited. If you name a planet that does not exist, then the
computer will simply reject the order. Unfortunately, this allows
cheaters to attempt to name up to nine planets in a sector that they
know nothing about and, thus, to find out how many planets are in the
sector. To protect against this kind of cheating, the computer will
notify the gamemaster of any such attempts. Also, if your gamemaster is
running the Far Horizons list server, then this will also occur when
using the FHTest feature of the list server.

.. _sec:specifyingzero:

SPECIFYING ZERO QUANTITY
------------------------

Whenever it makes sense, you can specify “0” quantity in an order to
indicate that ALL available quantity should be used. Here are some
examples:

::

           Build   0 PD    ; Spend all remaining funds on planetary defenses.

           CONT    BAS Deep Space 9, 0     ; Increase size of starbase as much as
                                           ;  remaining funds allow, but do not
                                           ;  exceed tonnage limit.

           Cont    DD Dagger, 0    ; Spend all remaining funds (up to what is
                                   ;  actually needed) on DD.

           Recy    0 RM    ; Recycle all excess RMs.

           Install 0 IU, PL Mars   ; Install all \texttt{IU}s that are on Mars.

           SEN 0 SP Klingon        ; Send all economic units we have to the
                                   ;       Klingons.

           UPGRADE BAS Wobbly, 0   ; Spend all remaining production (or as much
                                   ;       as is needed) upgrading the starbase.

A zero argument used in a production command will NOT automatically
spend economic units owned by the species. It will only spend what is
available from production capacity and raw material units. If you wish
to spend economic units, you must provide a non-zero argument. For the
``DEVELOP`` command, a zero argument will work as expected. Thus, if you
specify “0”, it will spend the remaining balance for the planet, and it
will not spend any economic units (e.g. ``DEV 0 PL Mars``). However, if
you do NOT specify a spending limit (e.g. ``DEV PL Mars``), then the
entire balance, if needed, including economic units, will be used.

.. _sec:effectofcombat:

THE EFFECT OF COMBAT ON THE RELIABILITY OF STATUS REPORTS
---------------------------------------------------------

A status report provides information about the status of your species IF
COMBAT DOES NOT OCCUR AT THE VERY BEGINNING OF THE NEXT TURN.

If combat DOES occur during the combat phase, then the information on
the status report may be unreliable. Here are a few examples:

a. If combat destroys some or all of the mining and manufacturing bases
   on a planet, then production for the planet will be less than
   indicated on the status report, and some production orders may be
   rejected by the computer.

b. If ships are destroyed during combat, then commands that involve
   these ships (e.g. ``JUMP``, ``ORBIT``, ``TRANSFER``, etc.) will be
   rejected by the computer.

c. Ships that jumped into the star system in the previous turn and
   ``LAND``\ ed or ``ORBIT``\ ed a planet will not actually be able to
   ``LAND`` or ``ORBIT`` if they are destroyed in combat.

In other words, the information in your status report assumes that
combat at the very beginning of the next turn will not change the
situation. It is important to keep this in mind when reading and
interpreting your status reports. For example, if your status report
shows that a large enemy fleet has just entered orbit around your home
planet, IT MAY NOT BE TRUE. If you issue combat orders to fight the
enemy in deep space, you may be able to prevent them from reaching your
home world.

Thus, in effect, the status report shows you what the situation will be
if combat does not occur at the very beginning of the next turn. If
combat DOES occur, then the status report may be wrong.

.. _sec:shipyardcapacity:

SHIPYARD CAPACITY
-----------------

Each producing planet will have a shipyard capacity which will limit how
many ships can be built in a single turn. The shipyard capacity of the
home planet will be one when the game begins. The shipyard capacity of a
normal colony will start at zero.

The number of production orders that you issue to ``BUILD``,
``CONTINUE``, ``IBUILD``, or ``ICONTINUE`` ships or starbases may not
exceed the shipyard capacity. (The ``IBUILD`` and ``ICONTINUE`` commands
will be discussed later.) For example, if you wish to issue three
``BUILD`` commands for new warships, a ``CONTINUE`` command for a
transport, and a ``CONTINUE`` command for a starbase, then the planet
must have a shipyard capacity of at least five. Orders that exceed the
shipyard capacity will be ignored. Orders to build other items such as
colonist units, planetary defense units, and so on, do NOT require
shipyard capacity. Only construction of warships, transports, and
starbases requires shipyard capacity.

If you wish to increase the shipyard capacity of a planet, you must
issue a ``SHIPYARD`` command during the production phase. This command
will increase the number of shipyards on the planet by one. You may only
issue one ``SHIPYARD`` order per planet per turn. The cost to build a
shipyard is ten times the current manufacturing tech level. You may not
build shipyards on mining or resort colonies.

.. _sec:limitsoncolonysize:

LIMITATIONS ON COLONY SIZE
--------------------------

In Far Horizons, colonies grow mainly by installing mining and
manufacturing units, and there is no limit to how many units may be
installed. In fact, it’s even possible for a colony to eventually
produce more spendable income than the home planet. While this is not
necessarily unrealistic, there must be a limit to how large and
productive a colony can become. Otherwise, runaway growth would make the
game unplayable.

We will deal with this potential problem by defining a new concept
called "economic efficiency" which will apply to colonies, but not to
the home planet. The economic efficiency of a colony will be 100% if its
economic base (i.e., the sum of its mining and manufacturing bases) is
not more than 200.0. If the sum is greater than 200.0, then the economic
efficiency will be a percentage smaller than 100%.

When the computer calculates the production for a colony it will
multiply the result by the economic efficiency to determine the actual
amount that will be available for spending. For example, if the original
amount is 2107, and the economic efficiency is 82%, then the actual
amount available to spend will be :math:`82\%` of :math:`2107 = 1727`.
(Note that fractions are dropped. This calculation will be done after
the calculation of the production penalty but before the calculation of
the fleet maintenance cost.)

Here is how the economic efficiency (``EE``) will be calculated:

.. math:: \textrm{EE}  =  100  \times  \dfrac{200.0 + (\textrm{total economic base} - 200.0) / 20}{\textrm{total economic base}}\textrm{percent}

In effect, any installation of ``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s beyond the 200.0
value will have only 5% of its normal effect.

Keep in mind that the above applies only to colonies, since it is not
possible to install ``IU``\ s and ``AU``\ s on a home planet, and since
it is not possible to colonize the home planet of another species.

Note that players NEVER have to do any of the above calculations! All of
the calculations will be done by the computer and the results will be
printed on your status reports. It is very important, though, that you
keep the 200.0 limit in mind, since installation of mining and
manufacturing units after the 200.0 limit has been reached will not be
very effective.

In Far Horizons, it’s also possible for more than one species to
colonize the same planet. Thus, when doing the above calculation, the
computer will use the total economic base for ALL species on the planet.
In other words, the economic efficiency will apply to an entire planet,
NOT just to a single colony on the planet, and will be the same for all
colonies on the planet.

Now, even with the above rules, you will discover that many colonies
generate more income than the homeworld, even though the homeworld has a
much greater population.

There’s nothing unrealistic about this if you keep in mind that
homeworld production is the result of taxation. A colony (at least in
its earlier stages) is completely owned by the government. In other
words, the government owns all the resources, employs all of the
population, keeps all the profits, and does not pay taxes. It can even
tax the colonists (what one hand gives, the other takes away :-). Also,
the total production on the home planet that is available for the player
to use is only a small fraction of the total taxes actually collected by
the government. Most taxes will be spent on other things, such as
schools, police, health care, social security, boondoggles, and so on,
and will not be available to the player.

In time, the same thing will happen to colonies, although not to the
same extent as on the home planet, and definitely not within the course
of a game. As the colony becomes more and more self-sufficient, a
smaller and smaller fraction of its TOTAL production is owned directly
by the government while a larger and larger fraction is due to taxes on
the private sector. The 200.0 base limit is simply a game device that
allows us to simulate the transition from a government-owned corporation
to a more normal economy.

So, keep the 200.0 limit in mind. You may continue to install ``IU``\ s
and ``AU``\ s beyond the limit, but it will take much longer to pay off
the investment, and, in general, you will be much better off if you
install the units elsewhere.

.. raw:: latex

   \appendix

HIGH-TECH ITEMS AND CAPABILITIES
================================

A high-tech item is different from other items already discussed in that
it has a “critical” technology that is needed in its construction. For
example, if a species wants to build Starbase Units, it must have a
Manufacturing tech level of at least 20. Whenever your species achieves
a tech level needed to build one of these special items, you will be
notified on the status report. Unless stated otherwise, all items can be
built using the ``BUILD`` or ``IBUILD`` command (the ``IBUILD`` command
is described later).

STARBASE UNITS
--------------

A species with a Manufacturing tech level of at least 20 may build
Starbase Units. These units are modular units that can be transported to
remote locations where there is no production capability, and used to
build starbases. For example, using starbase units, you can build a
starbase at a resort or mining colony, or even at a location where there
is no star system.

Starbase units have a cost of 110 each, and require a cargo capacity of
20 each. Use the abbreviation ``SU`` for starbase units. When installed,
each unit will contribute 10,000 tons to the total mass of the starbase.

Starbase units are installed using the ``BASE`` command, which has the
same format as the TRANSFER command. The first argument of the command
is the number of starbase units that are to be installed. The second
argument is the name of the ship or planet that will provide the
starbase units. The third argument is the name of the starbase that is
to be built or increased in size.

The first argument is optional. If it is missing or zero, then all
available starbase units will be used. The ``BASE`` command may only be
used in the pre- departure section of your orders. Here are some
examples:

   The Human transport TR16 Barrel of Monkeys jumps to the location x =
   7, y = 12, z = 14. There is no star system at this location. The
   transport is carrying 7 starbase units. The order:

   ::

      START PRE-DEPARTURE
      ; Place pre-departure orders here.

              Base    TR16 Barrel of Monkeys, BAS Deep Space 3

      END

will unload all seven starbase units and construct the 70,000 ton
starbase named BAS Deep Space 3.

In the next turn, the Human transport TR20 Tub of Lard jumps to
coordinates 7 12 14 carrying 10 more starbase units. The order:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

        BAS    4   TR20 Tub of Lard, BAS Deep Space 3

   END

will install 4 of the units, increasing the size of the starbase from
70,000 to 110,000 tons. The six unused starbase units will remain
onboard the transport.

A starbase built using the ``BASE`` command will always be built at the
same location as the ship or planet that provides the units. For
example, if a transport carrying the starbase units is in orbit or
landed on a planet, then the starbase will be built in orbit around the
same planet. If the transport is at an X Y Z location that does not
contain a star system, then the starbase will be in ’deep space’ at that
location. However, if an X Y Z location contains a star system, then the
starbase MUST be built in orbit around one of the planets in the star
system. It is not practical (for game purposes) to allow a starbase to
be located in the ’deep space’ section of a star system.

If an existing starbase is being increased in size, it will remain in
its original location. Obviously, the ship or planet providing the units
must be at the same X Y Z coordinates as the starbase, although they do
not have to be at the same planet, if any.

Since starbases built using starbase units are not likely to be near a
planet where they can be upgraded, a normal upgrade is not possible.
However, an effective upgrade can be accomplished by using Damage Repair
Units, which are discussed in the next section.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

DAMAGE REPAIR UNITS
-------------------

A species with a Manufacturing tech level of at least 30 may build
Damage Repair Units. These units are used to repair or upgrade ships in
the field, where it is not possible to do a normal upgrade using the
``UPGRADE`` command.

Damage repair units are not simply spare parts that can be used to
repair a ship. Instead, they are a combination of special ‘matrix’
materials that undergo mass/energy/mass conversion to produce the needed
replacement parts (similar to the ’replicator’ technology of Star Trek).

Damage repair units cost 50 each and require a cargo capacity of 1. Use
the abbreviation ``DR`` for damage repair units.

Damage repair units effectively repair or upgrade a ship by reducing the
age of the ship. The age reduction is determined as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Age reduction}    =    \dfrac{160,000  \times  \textrm{N}}{\textrm{ship tonnage}}

where N is the number of damage repair units that are used to do the
repair or upgrade. For example, if 7 damage repair units are used on a
60,000 ton transport, then the age reduction will be
:math:`(160,000 \times 7)/60,000 = 18.67 = 18`. Note that fractions are
dropped.

The age reduction will never reduce the age to less than zero. The
damage repair units must be carried as cargo by the ship that is being
repaired or upgraded, and will be consumed by the operation.

The repair/upgrade may be done in either the pre-departure or
post-arrival phase of the turn using the ``REPAIR`` command. Here are
some examples:

::

   START PRE-DEPARTURE
   ; Place pre-departure orders here.

           Repair  BC Big Bend, 25 ; Use 25 damage repair units to reduce
                                   ;  the age of the battlecruiser by 10.

           REP     BAS Strong Arm, 17      ; Use 17 damage repair units
                                           ;  to reduce the age of the
                                           ;  90,000 ton starbase by 30.

           repa    FF Gorby Too, 0 ; Use all 5 units onboard to reduce the
                                   ;  age of the frigate by 8.

           rep     DD Dagger       ; Use as many units as are needed to reduce
                                   ;  the age to zero.

   END

If N is zero, then all units that are onboard the ship will be used (but
not more than are necessary to reduce the age to zero). If N is not
specified, then as many units as are needed to reduce the age to zero
will be used and MUST be onboard.

It is also possible to have all ships at a particular location
(including starbases and transports) pool their damage repair units,
using them on the ships that need them the most. To do this, the
``REPAIR`` command should be given only the X Y Z coordinates of the
location where the repairs are to be done, as in the following example:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           Repair  23 12 9         ; Have all ships in the sector pool their DRs
                                   ;  and do as much repair work as possible.
   END

In the above example, all of the ships in the sector will pool their
damage repair units and repair only those ships that need repairing,
starting with the most heavily damaged, and continuing until all ships
are completely repaired or until you run out of ``DR``\ s.

You may also specify a “desired age” as in the following example:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           Repair  23 12 9 7       ; Have all ships in the sector pool their DRs
                                   ;  and do as much repair work as possible down
                                   ;  to age 7 but no lower.  Do not repair ships
                                   ;  if their age is already 7 or less.
   END

In the above example, all of the ships in the sector will pool their
damage repair units and repair only those ships that need repairing,
starting with the most heavily damaged, and continuing until all ships
are completely repaired to age 7 or until you run out of DRs.

If there are still DRs left after all repairs have been made, there is
no way to predict which ships will be carrying them.

When a ship is damaged in combat, it is possible that some or all of its
cargo will be destroyed, including damage repair units. Since this
happens quite often, it is not logged. Thus, it’s possible for REPAIR
commands to fail or to not have the desired or expected result.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

INTERSPECIES CONSTRUCTION
-------------------------

A species with a Manufacturing tech level of at least 25 may build
items, ships, and starbases for other species. This type of construction
will be referred to as ‘interspecies construction’.

You may construct things for another species using the ``IBUILD`` and
``ICONTINUE`` commands. These commands are similar to the ``BUILD`` and
``CONTINUE`` commands with the following exceptions:

a. An additional argument indicating the name of the recipient species
   must appear immediately after the ``IBUILD`` or ``ICONTINUE`` command
   word.

b. The ``IBUILD`` and ``ICONTINUE`` commands must always complete
   construction of the item in the current turn. Thus, they must NOT
   indicate an amount to spend unless the item is a starbase. Obviously,
   they must have a final argument indicating the amount to spend if the
   item IS a starbase.

If you wish, you may use “zero” arguments if the item being built is a
starbase or anything other than a ship.

When ships or starbases are built, they will be put in orbit around the
planet which produced them, and ownership will then be transferred to
the new owner.

Items other than ships and starbases will be added to the inventory of
the colony of the new owner that is on the same planet as the planet
that built them. Thus, the species that will receive the items must have
a colony on the same planet. If not, the computer will automatically
execute a ``NAME`` command for the recipient species using the same name
as the producing planet.

If you want to build a ship or starbase over more than one turn, use the
normal ``BUILD`` and ``CONTINUE`` commands for the initial stages of
construction, and use the ``ICONTINUE`` command for the final stage of
construction. If the item is to be built in one turn, use the ``IBUILD``
command. In other words, the IBUILD and ``ICONTINUE`` commands always
terminate construction and transfer the result to the recipient species.

When building something for another species, a premium of ten percent
will be added to the cost. (If the premium is not a whole number, it
will be rounded UP to the next whole number.) When the ``ICONTINUE``
command is used for the final stage of construction, the premium will be
based on the TOTAL cost of the ship or starbase - NOT on just the
remaining cost.

You may only use the ``ICONTINUE`` command on a ship or starbase that
YOU own. You may not use the ``ICONTINUE`` command on a ship or starbase
that is already owned by another species.

You MAY use the ``ICONTINUE`` command to increase the size of a starbase
that you received earlier from someone else and transfer it back to the
original species or even to a third species (or fourth, or fifth, etc).
In each case, however, the premium will be based on the TOTAL value of
the starbase - not just on what was added.

Here are some examples:

   The Humans and Klingons both have colonies on the same planet. The
   Human colony is called PL Big Deal and the Klingon colony is called
   PL Khaarsh Dukh. The Humans give the production order:

   ::

              Ibuild  SP Klingon, 21 IU

   When the order is executed, 21 colonial mining units will be added to
   the inventory of PL Khaarsh Dukh. The total cost to the Humans will
   be :math:`21 + 10\% (\textrm{rounded up}) = 21 + 3 = 24`. If the
   Klingons did not already have a name for the planet, then the name
   “PL Big Deal” would have been created for them and would appear on
   the Klingon status report.

   Later, the Klingons issue the following orders during the production
   phases of turns 16, 17, and 18:

   ::

          Turn 16:        Build           BAS Dagger, 200
          Turn 17:        Continue        BAS Dagger, 300
                          Build           DD Hammer, 250

          Turn 18:        Icontinue       SP Human, BAS Dagger, 200
                          Icontinue       SP Human, DD Hammer

   At the end of turn 18, the Humans would be the new owners of a
   destroyer and a 70,000 ton starbase. The Klingons would have paid the
   normal costs of 200 during turn 16, and 550 during turn 17. However,
   the amount paid during turn 18 would be the normal cost, plus a
   premium based on the TOTAL value of the items, as follows:

   | Destroyer: :math:`(1500 - 250) + (10\%` of
     :math:`1500) = 1250 + 150 = 1400`
   | Starbase: :math:`200 + (10\%` of :math:`700) = 200 + 70 = 270`

The ``IBUILD`` command may not be used to build colonist units or
planetary defense units.

You may not build something for a species you haven’t met.

You may not build items for a species that you have declared to be an
``ENEMY``. If you attempt to build something for an ``ENEMY`` species,
the computer will reject your order. If you wish to build something for
an ``ENEMY``, then issue a temporary ``NEUTRAL`` order and cancel it
immediately afterwards, as in the following example:

::

       Neutral SP Klingon
       Ibuild  SP Klingon, 21 IU
       Enemy   SP Klingon

All ships and items produced with the ``IBUILD`` and ``ICONTINUE``
commands will operate at the tech levels of the recipient species.

If the cost of an item is based on a tech level (such as terraforming
plants), the cost will be based on the tech level of the builder.
However, the item will always operate at the tech level of whoever is
using it.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

AUXILIARY GUN UNITS
-------------------

A species with a Military tech level of at least 10 may build Auxiliary
Gun Units. These units are carried as cargo and add to a warship’s
existing offensive power. Basically, these units can be used to convert
unused cargo space into additional offensive capacity.

Auxilairy gun units are designed to enhance the normal firepower of
warships only. They may not be used on transports or starbases, although
they may be carried as cargo.

Auxiliary gun units come in the sizes listed in
Table \ `[tab:auxguns] <#tab:auxguns>`__.

.. table:: Auxiliary gun unit sizes

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Unit**    | **Equivalen | **Needed    |             | **Minimum   |
   |             | t**         | Carrying**  |             | Military**  |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Abbreviat | **Tonnage** | **Capacity* | **Unit      | **Tech      |
   | ion**       |             | *           | Cost**      | Level**     |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU1         | 50,000      | 5           | 250         | 10          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU2         | 100,000     | 10          | 500         | 20          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU3         | 150,000     | 15          | 750         | 30          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU4         | 200,000     | 20          | 1000        | 40          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU5         | 250,000     | 25          | 1250        | 50          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU6         | 300,000     | 30          | 1500        | 60          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU7         | 350,000     | 35          | 1750        | 70          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU8         | 400,000     | 40          | 2000        | 80          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | GU9         | 450,000     | 45          | 2250        | 90          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

The ‘Equivalent tonnage’ indicates the amount of additional offensive
capacity that the unit provides. For example, a 300,000 ton heavy
cruiser carrying two GU3s will have the normal firepower of a heavy
cruiser PLUS the firepower of two 150,000 ton destroyers.

Note that the FIREPOWER is additive — NOT the tonnage. Thus, the above
heavy cruiser does NOT have the offensive power of a single 600,000 ton
ship! Keep in mind that the defensive and offensive power of a ship is
NOT proportional to the tonnage. Larger ships are more powerful than
several smaller ships of the same total tonnage. For example, the
firepower of a single 400,000 ton battlecruiser is significantly greater
than the combined firepower of four 100,000 ton frigates. Also, greater
firepower does not necessarily mean that a ship will fire more often per
round, since shots are often combined. It DOES mean, however, that the
same number of shots will do more damage.

Use the ``BUILD`` command to build auxiliary gun units. For example, to
build 3-100,000 ton auxiliary gun units, give the production order:

::

       BUILD 3 GU2

The total cost will be 1500.

On the status reports, auxiliary gun units will be referred to as
“Mark-1 Gun Units”, “Mark-2 Gun Units”, etc. corresponding respectively
to GU1, GU2, etc.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

FAIL-SAFE JUMP UNITS
--------------------

A species with a Gravitics tech level of at least 20 may build Fail-Safe
Jump Units. The function of these devices is to provide more accurate
control of the energies involved in an interstellar jump. They
accomplish this by tuning themselves to the ship’s engines and absorbing
any stray energies that would result in a mis-jump or self-destruction.
In game terms, this is what happens:

   If a ship is about to mis-jump or self-destruct, then the Fail-safe
   jump unit will instead be destroyed, and another attempt will be made
   automatically. If a ship carries more than one unit, then the process
   may be repeated. In effect, if a mishap occurs, a fail-safe jump unit
   is destroyed and the dice are rolled again.

Each unit costs 25 to build, and requires a carrying capacity of 1. Use
the class abbreviation ``FS`` for Fail-Safe Jump Units. For example, to
build 3 units, give the production order:

::

       BUILD   3 FS

The total cost will be :math:`3 \times 25 = 75`.

Fail-safe jump units will be used automatically, whenever they are
needed, as long as they are carried by a ship.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

JUMP PORTAL UNITS
-----------------

A species with a Gravitics tech level of at least 25 may build Jump
Portal Units. These devices are carried as cargo on a starbase, and a
starbase that carries these units is called a “jump portal”. A jump
portal can be used to allow sub-light ships to cross interstellar
distances as if they had a jump drive of their own. In effect, jump
portals create a private wormhole for the sub-light ship using them.
Jump portals can also be used by older FTL ships to reduce their chances
of a mishap. There is no limit on how many times jump portals may be
used in a single turn. Jump portals may NOT be used to move starbases.

In order for jump portal units to be effective, they must be loaded onto
a starbase. In effect, the starbase that carries them becomes the
control center for a portal. A starbase may carry as many jump portal
units as needed, as long as it has sufficient cargo capacity.

A jump portal is characterized by an effective tonnage, which indicates
the maximum tonnage of a ship that may use it. For example, a jump
portal with an effective tonnage of 80,000 tons will allow any ship to
use it that is 80,000 tons or less. The effective tonnage of a jump
portal is 10,000 times the number of jump portal units carried by the
starbase. For example, if a starbase carries 20 jump portal units, then
a ship of up to 200,000 tons may use the portal. Units carried by
different starbases may NOT be combined to increase their effective
tonnage - the units affecting a single ship must be on a single
starbase. Note that the tonnage of the starbase is not important. Only
the number of jump portal units carried by the starbase is important.

Jump portal units have the class abbreviation ``JP``, a cost of 100
each, and require a carrying capacity of 10 each. You can build jump
portal units in the usual way, using the ``BUILD`` command:

::

   Build   3 JP    ; Build 3 jump portal units, total cost = 300.  

Jump portals are used with the ``PJUMP`` command in the jump phase of
the turn. For example:

::

       Pjump   TR4S Willow's Helm,   PL Orion IV, BAS Seneca Portal
       PJU CTS Hippocrates, 12 3 22, Bas Deep space 9

Note that the last argument of the ``PJUMP`` command is the name of the
starbase carrying the jump portal units. Jump portals may NOT be used to
move cargo or colonists directly. These items may only be moved if they
are being carried as cargo by a ship that uses the portal.

Note also that a jump portal can only operate in one direction. It can
send a ship TO a different location, but it cannot receive a ship FROM a
different location. Thus, in order to establish two-way travel between
two different locations, you must have a jump portal at both locations.

It is also possible to use a jump portal owned by another species, if
that species gives you permission. You may give another species
permission to use all of your jump portals with the ``ALLY`` command:

::

       Ally    SP Klingon

The above order tells the computer that you consider the Klingons to be
allies and that they are allowed to use any of your jump portals.
``ALLY`` orders must appear in the pre-departure or post-arrival section
of the orders and will remain in effect until cancelled with a
``NEUTRAL`` or ``ENEMY`` order.

If you want to allow more than one species to use your portals, then
provide a separate ``ALLY`` order for each species:

::

       Ally    SP Klingon
       ALL Sp Vulcans
       ALLY    sp bajorans

A ship using a jump portal uses the age of the starbase and the
gravitics tech level of the species that owns the starbase to determine
mishap probabilities. However, only the ship using a portal can suffer a
mis-jump or self-destruction. Fail-safe Jump Units carried by the ship
will have their usual effect. Fail-safe Jump Units on the starbase will
have no effect at all.

The use of jump portals by a starbase will have no effect on its
offensive or defensive combat abilities.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

FORCED MISJUMP UNITS
--------------------

A species with a Gravitics tech level of at least 30 may build Forced
Misjump Units. These devices are carried and used on a starbase, and are
designed to force hostile ships to leave the star system. In effect,
they are used as weapons. If their operation is successful, then any
targeted ship will mis- jump to a different location. Furthermore, the
ship may self-destruct.

Forced misjump units are characterized by an effective tonnage, which
indicates the maximum tonnage of a ship that can be affected by them.
The effective tonnage is 10,000 times the number of units carried by the
starbase. Units carried on different starbases may NOT be used in
concert to increase their effective tonnage. The units affecting a
single ship must be on a single starbase.

The base chance of forcing a misjump is 2% times the attacker’s
gravitics tech level minus the target’s gravitics tech level. This value
is increased by 2 percentage points for each forced misjump unit carried
in excess of what is actually needed to affect the target. Note that the
base chance can be negative, but the effective chance can still be
positive if a sufficient number of units are used.

If the misjump occurs, a wormhole with totally random properties will be
created and the target ship will be forced into it. The destination will
be a randomly chosen location within the galaxy. (The x, y, and z
co-ordinates will be random values between 0 and 99, inclusive.) Since
this could be a large distance from the original location, the ship may
self-destruct.

Forced misjump units are used automatically whenever a starbase which
carries them takes part in combat. However, achieving a “lock on” can be
difficult in a fast-paced battle, and an opportunity to use the devices
may or may not arrive in a particular round of combat. Sometimes,
though, if conditions are exceptionally good, more than one “lock on”
may occur in a single round.

Forced misjump units have the class abbreviation ``FM``, a cost of 100
each, and require a carrying capacity of 5 each.

Fail-safe jump units carried by a target will not prevent a forced
misjump, but they may help prevent self-destruction.

Forced misjump units will not be used against starbases.

If a ship is forced to jump during the strike phase, then the ship name
will contain the designation “FJ” in the status report. These ships will
jump automatically in the jump phase of the next turn, and any explicit
jump orders will be ignored.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

FORCED JUMP UNITS
-----------------

A species with a Gravitics tech level of at least 40 may build Forced
Jump Units. These devices are carried and used on a starbase and are
designed to force hostile ships to leave the star system. In effect,
they are used as non- lethal weapons, and are the non-destructive
counterpart of forced mis-jump units. If their operation is successful,
then any targeted ship will jump to a different location. Furthermore,
unlike forced MIS-jump units, ships affected by forced jump units will
NOT normally self-destruct, since the wormhole created by the units is
controlled and set for only a very short distance from the original
location.

In all other respects, forced jump units are like forced misjump units.

Forced jump units have the class abbreviation “FJ”, a cost of 125 each,
and require a carrying capacity of 5 each.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

GRAVITIC TELESCOPES
-------------------

A species with a gravitics tech level of at least 50 may build Gravitic
Telescopes. A gravitic telescope allows the user to detect alien ships
and inhabited planets at large distances from the X Y Z location of the
telescope itself.

A gravitic telescope operates on the same principle as interstellar
communication devices; that is, a small wormhole is created and used as
a conduit for the transmission of information. However, unlike
interstellar communication devices (which are used in pairs), a gravitic
telescope is only needed on the receiving end.

Gravitic telescopes are installed and used on starbases. In effect, the
starbase provides the control center for the operation of the telescope.
The range in parsecs of a gravitic telescope is simply the number of
telescope units that are carried by the starbase divided by two
(fractions dropped). For example, if a starbase is carrying seven
gravitic telescope units, then it may observe aliens up to three parsecs
away. The maximum distance is also limited by the gravitics tech level
of the species, as follows:

.. math:: \textrm{Maximum distance}  =  \dfrac{\textrm{Gravitics tech level}}{10}

Fractions are dropped. If a starbase carries more units than are allowed
by the tech level, then the excess units will not be used.

To operate a gravitic telescope, use the ``TELESCOPE`` command in the
post-arrival section of your orders, as follows:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

        Telescope  BAS Peeping Tom

   END

where the first and only argument is the name of the starbase that
carries the gravitic telescope units. The above order will provide a
list of all detectable alien ships, starbases, and populated planets
within the range of the telescope.

The information provided by a gravitic telescope is exactly the same as
the information that appears on your status reports when one of your
ships is at the same X Y Z coordinates as an alien ship or planet; i.e.,
the names of ships in orbit or in deep space, and the names and
approximate economic bases of populated planets. For planets, the
approximate economic base will be indicated by a single number in
parentheses immediately following the planet name. Ships that have
landed or that are under construction are not listed. Ships and
starbases that are at coordinates that do NOT contain a star system will
be listed if they are within range of the telescope.

In addition, if use of a gravitic telescope detects an alien starbase
that ITSELF contains one or more gravitic telescope units, then the
number of units on the alien starbase will also be listed.

A gravitic telescope is a very delicate and difficult instrument to
operate, and it is possible that some ships/planets may not be detected.
The chance of detecting a particular ship or planet will depend on the
gravitic tech level of the species operating the telescope (the higher
the better). For planets, the probability of detection will also depend
on how much industry there is on the planet and on whether or not a
colony is actively hiding. In general, home planets and large colonies
are easy to detect, while smaller colonies are harder to detect. Large
ships are easier to detect than small ships. Field- distorted ships
(discussed later) are impossible to detect.

A gravitic telescope requires a cargo capacity of 20, and has a cost of
500. Use the item abbreviation ``GT`` for Gravitic Telescopes.

It is possible that the operation of a gravitic telescope will be
detected by orbiting ships or starbases of the observed species. The
chance of detection is:

.. math:: \textrm{Chance of Detection}  =  2  \times  (\textrm{GV2}  -  \textrm{GV1})

where ``GV2`` is the gravitics tech level of the species being watched,
and GV1 is the gravitics tech level of the observer. If the chance is
zero or negative, then the observer will not be detected. For example,
if SP Ferengi (``GV`` = 32) is spying on SP Human (``GV`` = 39), then
the Humans have a 2 x (39 - 32) = 14 percent chance that they will know
that they are being observed.

The check for detection will be done once for each orbiting ship or
starbase that is observed by the gravitic telescope. Planets and ships
landed on the surface cannot detect the operation of a gravitic
telescope because of the interference from the planet’s gravity.

The observer will not know if he is detected.

If the observer is detected, then the status report of the species being
watched will indicate the location of the observer’s gravitic telescope.

If operation of a gravitic telescope observes an alien starbase that
ITSELF contains a gravitic telescope, then the above chance will be
increased by two times the number of gravitic telescope units carried by
the starbase:

.. math:: \textrm{Chance of Detection}  =  2 \times \textrm{NGT}  +  (2  \times  (\textrm{GV2}  -  \textrm{GV1}))

where ``NGT`` is the number of gravitic telescopes on the starbase that
is being observed. For purposes of detection, ALL gravitic telescope
units on the starbase are counted, even if they cannot all be used to
scan distant locations because of the gravitic tech level limitation.

A ``TELESCOPE`` order may appear only in the post-arrival phase of the
turn. A starbase may be given only one ``TELESCOPE`` order per turn.

Colonies hidden by means of the ``HIDE`` command MAY be detected by a
gravitic telescope. The reason for this is that successful hiding
requires the ability to evade detection when aliens are present. If the
hiders do not know that they are being observed, then they may fail at
hiding. And even if a colony eventually discovers that it is being
scanned by a gravitic telescope, it may be too late for it to
successfully hide.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

AUXILIARY SHIELD GENERATORS
---------------------------

A species with a Life Support tech level of at least 10 may build
Auxiliary Shield Generators. These units are carried as cargo and add to
a warship’s existing shields. Basically, these units can be used to
convert unused cargo space into additional defensive shield capacity.

Auxilairy shield generators are designed to enhance the normal defensive
shields of warships only. They may not be used on transports or
starbases, although they may be carried as cargo.

.. table:: Shield generator sizes

   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Unit**    | **Equivalen | **Needed    |             | **Minimum   |
   |             | t**         | Carrying**  |             | Life        |
   |             |             |             |             | Support**   |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | **Abbreviat | **Tonnage** | **Capacity* | **Unit      | **Tech      |
   | ion**       |             | *           | Cost**      | Level**     |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG1         | 50,000      | 5           | 250         | 10          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG2         | 100,000     | 10          | 500         | 20          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG3         | 150,000     | 15          | 750         | 30          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG4         | 200,000     | 20          | 1000        | 40          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG5         | 250,000     | 25          | 1250        | 50          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG6         | 300,000     | 30          | 1500        | 60          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG7         | 350,000     | 35          | 1750        | 70          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG8         | 400,000     | 40          | 2000        | 80          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
   | SG9         | 450,000     | 45          | 2250        | 90          |
   +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

Shield generators come in the sizes listed in
Table \ `[tab:shields] <#tab:shields>`__.

The ‘Equivalent tonnage’ indicates the amount of additional defensive
capacity that the unit provides. For example, a 300,000 ton heavy
cruiser carrying two SG3s will have the normal shields of a heavy
cruiser PLUS the shields of two 150,000 ton destroyers.

Note that the SHIELD POWER is additive - NOT the tonnage. Thus, the
above heavy cruiser does NOT have the defensive shields of a single
300,000 ton ship! Keep in mind that the defensive and offensive power of
a ship is NOT proportional to the tonnage. Larger ships are more
powerful than several smaller ships of the same total tonnage. For
example, the shield power of a single 400,000 ton battlecruiser is
significantly greater than the combined shield power of four 100,000 ton
frigates.

Use the BUILD command to build auxiliary shield units. For example, to
build 3-100,000 ton auxiliary shield generators, give the production
order:

::

       BUILD 3 SG2

The total cost will be 1500.

On the status reports, auxiliary shield generators will be referred to
as “Mark-1 Shield Generators”, “Mark-2 Shield Generators”, etc.
corresponding respectively to SG1, SG2, etc.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

FIELD DISTORTION UNITS
----------------------

A species with a Life Support tech level of at least 20 may build Field
Distortion Units. These devices are carried only on ships and starbases,
and distort sensor data and visual data obtained by others. In effect, a
ship or starbase that carries field distortion units can be seen and its
size can be determined, but the name of the ship and the species that
owns it can NOT be determined. It is also not possible to determine if
the ship is sub-light or FTL.

In order for field distortion to take place, the ship or starbase must
carry a number of units EXACTLY equal to its tonnage divided by 10,000.
For example, since the tonnage of a battleship is 450,000, field
distortion will only take place if the ship carries EXACTLY 45 units. A
TR17S must carry EXACTLY 17 field distortion units, a 250,000 ton
starbase must carry EXACTLY 25 units, and so on. If a number of units
other than the required amount is carried, then they will simply be
carried as cargo and will not be put into operation.

Field distortion units have the class abbreviation ``FD``, a cost of 50
each, and require a carrying capacity of 1 each.

A ship using field distortion will appear to others as simply a class
abbreviation and the name “???”. The species name will simply be a
number. Here is an example of three alien ships that are using field
distortion units as listed on the status reports of the owners:

The owner of the first ship will see this:

::

   Ships at x = 19, y = 2, z = 36:
     Name                                           Cap. Cargo
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
     CT Thieve's Cant (A8,O2)                         2  2 FD

The owner of the second and third ships will see this:

::

   Ships at x = 19, y = 2, z = 36:
     Name                                           Cap. Cargo
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
     BCS Bandicoot (A3,D)                            40  40 FD
     BS Jabberwocky (A1,D)                           45  45 FD

And here is what other species at the same location would see:

::

   Aliens at x = 19, y = 2, z = 36:
     Name                                               Species
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
     CT ??? (O2)                                        SP 171
     BC ??? (D)                                         SP 92
     BS ??? (D)                                         SP 92

The battlecruiser and the battleship are both owned by the same species,
and the corvette is owned by a different species. The numbers are
randomly generated, but a particular number will always apply to the
same species as long as it stays at the same life support tech level. If
the tech level changes, then a new random number is generated. To add to
the confusion, it is possible, although highly unlikely, that two
species will have the same number at the same time.

For example, if SP 92 corresponds to SP Klingon in the above example,
then ALL field-distorted ships owned by the Klingons, wherever they may
be, will be listed as being owned by SP 92 as long as the Klingon life
support tech level does not change. However, it is also possible, but
very unlikely, that another species will also be assigned the number 92
at the same time.

If you wish to attack a species that is using field distortion units,
but you don’t know their real name, use the name that is listed in the
status report. For example, if you want to attack just the corvette
shown above, you should issue the combat order:

::

       ATTACK  SP 171

Field distortion units will be used in combat automatically, only if ALL
ships and starbases of a species at the battle location are using the
units, AND if the species has no populated planets at the battle
location. Otherwise the units will not be used but will simply be
carried as cargo. This is necessary because ships and planets of the
same species must collaborate, and doing so could easily betray the real
identity and owner of the ships.

In combat, field-distorted ships will be harder to hit. Specifically,
the chance-to-hit a field-distorted ship will be 25% less than the
chance to hit an undistorted ship.

If one or more field distortion units are destroyed in combat by damage
that passes through the shields, then the units will stop functioning,
and other participants in the battle will learn the real name of the
ship and of the species that owns the ship. Note that this will only
occur if the units were functioning when damage passed through the
shields. It will not occur if the units were simply being carried as
cargo. This also applies to ships that are destroyed in an intercept or
in an ambush.

For the purpose of INTERCEPTs only, a field-distorted ship will be
considered an enemy ship, even if the owner is not actually a declared
enemy. In other words, a ship that is “disguised” is assumed to be
inherently hostile.

Field distortion units should never be carried by an attacker if the
attacker plans to besiege a planet. It is impossible to conduct a siege
with field- distorted ships, and any attempt to do so will reveal the
true identity of the species using the units.

Field-distorted ships and starbases are completely invisible to
operators of gravitic telescopes.

Field distortion units can not be used by a ship that is landed on the
surface of a planet. Thus, the true name and species of a landed ship
will be known to another species if it has population on the same
planet.

Finally, note that by combining the use of field distortion units with
the HIJACK command, a species can raid its enemies and commit other acts
of piracy without giving away the attacker’s identity.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

POPULATION GROWTH
-----------------

A species with a Biology tech level of at least 20 will experience
enhanced population growth on colonies.

Advanced biological knowledge will increase the fertility and survival
rate of people on colony worlds. In Far Horizons, we will simulate this
reality by adding a bonus to population growth. Note that this bonus
will apply only to colonies — it will NOT apply to the homeworld.

Population growth will receive a bonus of N percentage points, where N
is the Biology tech level divided by 20, fractions dropped. For example,
if the normal population growth on a colony is 9 percent, and the
Biology tech level is 59, then the actual growth rate will be 9 + 59/20
= 11 percent.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

TERRAFORMING
------------

A species with a Biology tech level of at least 40 may terraform a
planet, making it more suitable for habitation. Terraforming has the
effect of modifying the planet’s temperature class, pressure class, and
gaseous composition.

Terraforming is accomplished by operating special atmospheric processing
plants on the surface which use biological and chemical methods to
modify the atmosphere. Terraforming can also be used to add an
atmosphere to a planet that doesn’t have one.

The number of plants needed to completely terraform a planet is exactly
the same as the life support requirement (``LSN``) for the planet. For
example, if your species requires a minimum Life Support tech level of 9
to establish a normal colony on the planet, then you must use 9
terraforming plants to completely terraform the planet.

The cost of each processing plant is 50,000 divided by the Biology tech
level of the species. For example, if the Biology tech level is 48, then
the amount needed to build a single plant is :math:`50,000/48 = 1041`
(drop fractions).

To build terraforming plants, use the ``BUILD`` command and the
abbreviation ``TP``:

::

       Build   6   TP  ; Build 6 terraforming plants.

Terraforming plants can then be transported to the colony where they
must be installed. Each terraforming plant requires a cargo capacity of
100.

Alternatively, if the colony has sufficient production capacity, you can
build the terraforming plants on the colony where they will be used.

To perform terraforming on a colony, you must issue a ``TERRAFORM``
command in the post-arrival section of your orders, after
``TRANSFER``\ ing the plants to the colony:

::

   START POST-ARRIVAL
   ; Place post-arrival orders here.

           Tran    6 tp    TR30 Big Boy, PL Epsilon Eridani IV
           Terraform 6     PL Epsilon Eridani IV
           SCAN            TR30 Big Boy

   END

The above commands will transfer six terraforming plants from the
transport to the colony and will then install and activate them. The
results of the terraforming take effect immediately. The ``SCAN`` order
will show you what the results are.

If the number of ``TP``\ s is not specified or is 0, then all available
TPs will be used, but not more than are actually needed to completely
terraform the colony.

When the ``TERRAFORM`` order is processed, the gamemaster’s computer
will change the planet’s temperature class, pressure class, and
atmospheric composition to bring them closer to the home planet’s. If
the colony does not have exactly the number needed to completely
terraform the planet, then a partial transformation will take place, in
the following order:

   | 1. Eliminate poisonous gases
   | 2. Add required gas
   | 3. Modify temperature class
   | 4. Modify pressure class

After installation, terraforming plants will not appear in the inventory
of the colony. In effect, they are “used up”. Terraforming plants may
not be recycled after installation.

Although terraforming takes effect immediately in game terms, you can
assume that it actually takes a few years. Consequently, if a species
were to attempt to terraform, say, the planet of an enemy, the residents
would have plenty of time to prevent the installation and operation of
the plants. Because of this, terraforming plants may NOT be operated on
a planet if one or more other species also live on the planet, unless
the other species allow it. The gamemaster’s computer will not be able
to check for this, but a player that violates this rule will be evicted
from the game.

The effects of terraforming will last until the end of a game, unless
counteracted by terraforming by another species.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

GERM WARFARE BOMBS
------------------

A species with a Biology tech level of at least 50 may build Germ
Warfare Bombs. When used successfully, a bomb will wipe out an entire
species on a particular planet.

Germ warfare is accomplished by seeding an inhabited planet with
specially designed micro-organisms which are delivered in a device
called a Germ Warfare Bomb. The effectiveness of the bomb is a function
of the relative Biology tech levels of the attacking species and target
species. Specifically, the base chance of success is 50%, and this value
is modified up or down by 2% per point of difference in Biology tech
levels of the two species.

A Germ Warfare Bomb has a cost of 1000, requires a carrying capacity of
100, and has the class abbreviation “GW”. It should be built using the
BUILD command, as in the following example:

::

   ;Build 2 germ warfare bombs.
        BUILD  2 GW

To use germ warfare bombs in combat, issue the appropriate ``ENGAGE``
and ``ATTACK`` order as discussed earlier in the section on combat. All
bombs that are present at the battle will be used. A separate check is
made for each bomb that the attacker takes to the battle. If at least
one bomb succeeds, then the defending species will be destroyed. Thus,
the more bombs an attacker brings, the greater will be the chance of
success.

Germ warfare bombs do their dirty work very quickly and an affected
planet may be safely colonized in the next turn. Remember, ALL mining
and manufacturing base that was originally on the planet will have been
destroyed. However, you will gain some economic units from looting.

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

CLASS ABBREVIATIONS
===================

The class abbreviations currently being used in FAR HORIZONS are listed
in Table \ `[tab:classabrvs] <#tab:classabrvs>`__. Remember, all ships
may be built in sub-light versions, which have an “S” suffixed to the
abbreviation. For example, a sub-light battleship has the class
abbreviation “BSS”, a sub-light 150,000 ton transport has the
abbreviation “TR15S”, etc.

.. table:: Class Abbreviations

   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | **Abbr**        | **Class Name**  | **Abbreviation* | **Class Name**  |
   |                 |                 | *               |                 |
   +=================+=================+=================+=================+
   | AU              | Colonial        | FS              | Fail-Safe Jump  |
   |                 | Manufacturing   |                 | Unit            |
   |                 | Unit            |                 |                 |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BAS             | Starbase        | GT              | Gravitic        |
   |                 |                 |                 | Telescope Unit  |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BC              | Battlecruiser   | GUn             | Auxiliary Gun   |
   |                 |                 |                 | Unit, Mark-n    |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BI              | Biology tech    | GV              | Gravitics tech  |
   |                 | level           |                 | level           |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BM              | Battlemoon      | GW              | Germ Warfare    |
   |                 |                 |                 | Bomb            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BR              | Battlestar      | IU              | Colonial Mining |
   |                 |                 |                 | Unit            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BS              | Battleship      | JP              | Jump Portal     |
   |                 |                 |                 | Units           |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | BW              | Battleworld     | LS              | Life Support    |
   |                 |                 |                 | tech level      |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | CA              | Heavy Cruiser   | MA              | Manufacturing   |
   |                 |                 |                 | tech level      |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | CC              | Command Cruiser | MI              | Mining tech     |
   |                 |                 |                 | level           |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | CL              | Light Cruiser   | ML              | Military tech   |
   |                 |                 |                 | level           |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | CS              | Strike Cruiser  | PB              | Picketboat      |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | CT              | Corvette        | PD              | Planetary       |
   |                 |                 |                 | Defense Unit    |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | CU              | Colonist Unit   | PL              | Planet          |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | DD              | Destroyer       | RM              | Raw Material    |
   |                 |                 |                 | Unit            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | DN              | Dreadnought     | SD              | Super           |
   |                 |                 |                 | Dreadnought     |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | DR              | Damage Repair   | SGn             | Auxiliary       |
   |                 | Unit            |                 | Shield          |
   |                 |                 |                 | Generator,      |
   |                 |                 |                 | Mark-n          |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | ES              | Escort          | SP              | Species         |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | FD              | Field           | SU              | Starbase Unit   |
   |                 | Distortion Unit |                 |                 |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | FF              | Frigate         | TP              | Terraforming    |
   |                 |                 |                 | Plant           |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | FJ              | Forced Jump     |                 |                 |
   |                 | Unit            |                 |                 |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
   | FM              | Forced Mis-jump | TRn             | Transport, eg.  |
   |                 | Unit            |                 | TR7 for 70,000  |
   |                 |                 |                 | tons, TR14 for  |
   |                 |                 |                 | 140,000 tons,   |
   |                 |                 |                 | etc.            |
   +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

COMMAND SUMMARY
===============

The commands currently being used in FAR HORIZONS are listed in
Table \ `[tab:commands] <#tab:commands>`__.

.. table:: Command Summary

   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | **Command**           | **Arguments**         | **Explanation**       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ALLY                  | sp                    | Declare species “sp”  |
   |                       |                       | to be an ally         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | AMBUSH                | n                     | Spend “n” in          |
   |                       |                       | preparation for       |
   |                       |                       | ambush                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ATTACK                | sp                    | Attack opponent “sp”  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ATTACK                | SP n                  | Attack                |
   |                       |                       | field-distorted       |
   |                       |                       | species number “n”    |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ATTACK                | 0                     | Attack all declared   |
   |                       |                       | enemies               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | AUTO                  |                       | Automatically         |
   |                       |                       | generate sensible     |
   |                       |                       | orders for next turn  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | BASE                  | [n] s,base            | Build or increase     |
   |                       |                       | size of starbase      |
   |                       |                       | “base” using “n”      |
   |                       |                       | starbase units from   |
   |                       |                       | “s”                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | BATTLE                | x y z                 | Set the location for  |
   |                       |                       | a battle              |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | BUILD                 | n ab                  | Build “n” items of    |
   |                       |                       | class “ab”            |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | BUILD                 | ship                  | Build “ship”          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | BUILD                 | ship,n                | Start building        |
   |                       |                       | “ship”, spend only    |
   |                       |                       | “n”                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | BUILD                 | base,n                | Start building        |
   |                       |                       | starbase “base”,      |
   |                       |                       | spend “n”             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | CONTINUE              | ship                  | Finish construction   |
   |                       |                       | of “ship”             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | CONTINUE              | ship,n                | Continue construction |
   |                       |                       | on “ship”, spend only |
   |                       |                       | “n”                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | CONTINUE              | base,n                | Increase size of      |
   |                       |                       | starbase “base”,      |
   |                       |                       | spend “n”             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | DESTROY               | ship                  | Destroy “ship”        |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | DESTROY               | base                  | Destroy starbase      |
   |                       |                       | “base”                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | DEVELOP               | [n]                   | Build ``CU``\ s,      |
   |                       |                       | ``IU``\ s, and        |
   |                       |                       | ``AU``\ s for         |
   |                       |                       | producing planet but  |
   |                       |                       | do not spend more     |
   |                       |                       | than “n”              |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | DEVELOP               | [n] pl                | Build ``CU``\ s,      |
   |                       |                       | ``IU``\ s, and        |
   |                       |                       | ``AU``\ s for colony  |
   |                       |                       | planet “pl” in same   |
   |                       |                       | sector but do not     |
   |                       |                       | spend more than “n”   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | DEVELOP               | [n] pl, ship          | Build ``CU``\ s,      |
   |                       |                       | ``IU``\ s, and        |
   |                       |                       | ``AU``\ s for colony  |
   |                       |                       | planet “pl” and load  |
   |                       |                       | units onto “ship” but |
   |                       |                       | do not spend more     |
   |                       |                       | than “n”              |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | DISBAND               | pl                    | Disband colony “pl”   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | END                   |                       | End current section   |
   |                       |                       | of the order form     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ENEMY                 | sp                    | Declare species “sp”  |
   |                       |                       | to be an enemy        |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ENEMY                 | n                     | Declare all species   |
   |                       |                       | to be enemies         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ENGAGE                | n [p]                 | Specify combat        |
   |                       |                       | engagement option “n” |
   |                       |                       | and optional planet   |
   |                       |                       | number “p”            |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ESTIMATE              | sp                    | Estimate tech levels  |
   |                       |                       | of species “sp”       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | HAVEN                 | x y x                 | Set rendezvous point  |
   |                       |                       | for ships that        |
   |                       |                       | withdraw from combat  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | HIDE                  |                       | Actively hide this    |
   |                       |                       | planet from alien     |
   |                       |                       | observation           |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | HIDE                  | ship                  | Keep “ship” out of    |
   |                       |                       | combat unless you     |
   |                       |                       | start to lose the     |
   |                       |                       | battle                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | HIJACK                | sp                    | Hijack opponent “sp”  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | HIJACK                | SP n                  | Hijack                |
   |                       |                       | field-distorted       |
   |                       |                       | species number “n”    |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | HIJACK                | 0                     | Hijack all declared   |
   |                       |                       | enemies               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | IBUILD                | sp,n ab               | Build “n” items of    |
   |                       |                       | class “ab” for        |
   |                       |                       | species “sp”          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | IBUILD                | sp,ship               | Build “ship” for      |
   |                       |                       | species “sp”          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | IBUILD                | sp,base,n             | Build starbase “base” |
   |                       |                       | for species “sp”,     |
   |                       |                       | spend “n”             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ICONTINUE             | sp ship               | Finish construction   |
   |                       |                       | of “ship” for species |
   |                       |                       | “sp”                  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ICONTINUE             | sp base,n             | Increase size of      |
   |                       |                       | starbase “base” for   |
   |                       |                       | species “sp”, spend   |
   |                       |                       | “n”                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | INSTALL               | n ab pl               | Install “n” ``IU``\ s |
   |                       |                       | or ``AU``\ s on       |
   |                       |                       | planet “pl”           |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | INSTALL               | pl                    | Install all available |
   |                       |                       | ``IU``\ s and         |
   |                       |                       | ``AU``\ s on planet   |
   |                       |                       | “pl”                  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | INTERCEPT             | n                     | Spend “n” in          |
   |                       |                       | preparation for       |
   |                       |                       | interception          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | JUMP                  | ship,loc              | Have “ship” jump to   |
   |                       |                       | destination “loc”     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | LAND                  | ship,pl               | Have “ship” land on   |
   |                       |                       | planet in same star   |
   |                       |                       | system                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | MESSAGE               | sp                    | Send a message to     |
   |                       |                       | species “sp”          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | MOVE                  | ship, x y z           | Move “ship” up to one |
   |                       |                       | parsec                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | MOVE                  | base, x y z           | Tow starbase “base”   |
   |                       |                       | up to one parsec      |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | NAME                  | x y z p PL name       | Give “name” to planet |
   |                       |                       | “p” at location "x y  |
   |                       |                       | z"                    |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | NEUTRAL               | sp                    | Declare neutrality    |
   |                       |                       | towards species “sp”  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | NEUTRAL               | n                     | Declare neutrality    |
   |                       |                       | towards all species   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ORBIT                 | ship,pl               | Have “ship” orbit     |
   |                       |                       | planet in same star   |
   |                       |                       | system                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | PJUMP                 | ship,loc,bas          | Have “ship” jump to   |
   |                       |                       | destination “loc” via |
   |                       |                       | jump portals on       |
   |                       |                       | starbase “bas”        |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | PRODUCTION            | PL name               | Start production on   |
   |                       |                       | planet “name”         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | RECYCLE               | n ab                  | Recycle “n” items of  |
   |                       |                       | class “ab”            |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | RECYCLE               | ship                  | Recycle “ship”        |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | RECYCLE               | base                  | Recycle starbase      |
   |                       |                       | “base”                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | REPAIR                | ship,n                | Repair “ship” using   |
   |                       |                       | “n” onboard damage    |
   |                       |                       | repair units          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | REPAIR                | base,n                | Repair “base” using   |
   |                       |                       | “n” onboard damage    |
   |                       |                       | repair units          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | REPAIR                | x y z [age]           | Repair as many        |
   |                       |                       | ships/starbases as    |
   |                       |                       | possible in sector x  |
   |                       |                       | y z, pooling damage   |
   |                       |                       | repair units but do   |
   |                       |                       | not reduce age below  |
   |                       |                       | “age”                 |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | RESEARCH              | n tech                | Spend “n” on research |
   |                       |                       | in technology “tech”  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | SCAN                  | ship                  | Have “ship” do a scan |
   |                       |                       | of its current        |
   |                       |                       | location              |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | SEND                  | n sp                  | Send “n” economic     |
   |                       |                       | units to species “sp” |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | SHIPYARD              |                       | Increase shipyard     |
   |                       |                       | capacity by one.      |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | START                 | section               | Start processing      |
   |                       |                       | “section” of the      |
   |                       |                       | order form            |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | SUMMARY               |                       | Provide only a brief  |
   |                       |                       | summary of combat     |
   |                       |                       | results, instead of   |
   |                       |                       | listing every single  |
   |                       |                       | hit and miss          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | TARGET                | n                     | Concentrate fire on   |
   |                       |                       | target type “n”       |
   |                       |                       | during combat         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | TEACH                 | tech [n] sp           | Transfer knowledge of |
   |                       |                       | technology “tech” to  |
   |                       |                       | species “sp” to       |
   |                       |                       | maximum tech level    |
   |                       |                       | “n”                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | TELESCOPE             | base                  | Operate gravitic      |
   |                       |                       | telescope on starbase |
   |                       |                       | “base”                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | TERRAFORM             | [n] pl                | Terraform planet “pl” |
   |                       |                       | using “n” TPs         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | TRANSFER              | n ab s,d              | Transfer “n” items of |
   |                       |                       | class “ab” from “s”   |
   |                       |                       | to “d”                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | UNLOAD                | ship                  | Transfer all          |
   |                       |                       | ``CU``\ s, ``IU``\ s, |
   |                       |                       | and ``AU``\ s from    |
   |                       |                       | “ship” or             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | UNLOAD                | base                  | starbase “base” to    |
   |                       |                       | the planet it is at   |
   |                       |                       | and install as many   |
   |                       |                       | ``IU``\ s and         |
   |                       |                       | ``AU``\ s as possible |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | UPGRADE               | ship                  | Upgrade “ship” to age |
   |                       |                       | zero                  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | UPGRADE               | base                  | Upgrade starbase      |
   |                       |                       | “base” to age zero    |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | UPGRADE               | ship,n                | Upgrade “ship”, spend |
   |                       |                       | “n”                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | UPGRADE               | base,n                | Upgrade starbase      |
   |                       |                       | “base”, spend “n”     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | VISITED               | x y z                 | Mark a star system as |
   |                       |                       | having been visited,  |
   |                       |                       | even if you have not  |
   |                       |                       | actually been there.  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | WITHDRAW              | n1 n2 n3              | Set conditions for    |
   |                       |                       | withdrawing from      |
   |                       |                       | combat                |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | WORMHOLE              | ship [,pl]            | Have “ship” jump to   |
   |                       |                       | opposite end of       |
   |                       |                       | wormhole and orbit    |
   |                       |                       | planet “pl” on        |
   |                       |                       | arrival               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | WORMHOLE              | base [,pl]            | Have starbase “base”  |
   |                       |                       | jump to opposite end  |
   |                       |                       | of wormhole and orbit |
   |                       |                       | planet “pl” on        |
   |                       |                       | arrival               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
   | ZZZ                   |                       | Terminate a MESSAGE   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

where:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ab                                | class abbreviation                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| base                              | name of a starbase, including     |
|                                   | “BAS” abbreviation                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| d                                 | name of a ship, starbase, or      |
|                                   | planet, including class           |
|                                   | abbreviation                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| loc                               | jump destination, either “x y z”  |
|                                   | or “PL name”                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| n                                 | a whole number, 0 or more         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| :math:`\left[n\right]`            | an optional whole number, 1 or    |
|                                   | more                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| name                              | name string, including any        |
|                                   | embedded spaces. May not start    |
|                                   | with a digit!                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| p                                 | planet number                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| pl                                | planet name, including            |
|                                   | abbreviation “PL”                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| s                                 | name of a ship, starbase, or      |
|                                   | planet, including class           |
|                                   | abbreviation                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| section                           | COMBAT, PRE-DEPARTURE, JUMPS,     |
|                                   | PRODUCTION or POST-ARRIVAL        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ship                              | name of a ship, including class   |
|                                   | abbreviation                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| sp                                | species name, including “SP”      |
|                                   | abbreviation                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| tech                              | technology abbreviation: MI, MA,  |
|                                   | ML, GV, LS, or BI                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| x y z                             | galactic coordinates of a sector  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

.. raw:: latex

   \newpage

SET-UP FORM FOR ENTERING A GAME
===============================

The following form must be filled out at the start of a game and sent to
the gamemaster. Refer to Chapter 3 for detailed information on how to
fill out the form.

::

   Allocate points to Military, Gravitics, Life Support, and Biology tech levels.
   You have a total of 15 points to allocate.
        Military:
        Gravitics:
        Life Support:
        Biology:

   [REMINDER: If a tech level is zero, you will not be able to raise it unless
   another species transfers the knowledge or technology to you.]

   Next, enter the names for your species, home planet, and government.
   You may use up to 31 characters each.

        Species name (MUST contain 7 or more characters):
        Home planet name:
        Government name:
        Government type:

If your gamemaster is running a list server for use by the players, then
your species name may not contain any of the special characters ‘$’
(dollar sign), ‘!’ (exclamation point), or ‘"’ (double quote). In
general, it is a good idea not to use any of these characters when
naming your species. Also, make sure that the name of your species
contains at least seven characters, including embedded spaces.

Fill out the above items and send them to the gamemaster before the game
starts.

**End of Rules for FAR HORIZONS**
